THE
SECRET HISTORY
OF THE
PRESENT INTRIGUES
OF THE
COURT OF CARAMANIA

London, Printed and sold by the Booksellers of
London and Westminster.
M.DCC.XXVII.



 I 
THE
SECRET HISTORY
OF THE
PRESENT INTRIGUES
OF THE
COURT OF CARAMANIA

  The large and fertile Province of Caramania is situated in that part of Asia which is call'd the Minor and was formerly in subjection to the Kings of Anatolia but THEODORE, the present Prince, having married HYANTHE, a Daughter of the late Monarch, had in Dowry with her a general Release from all Tribute, Fealty, and Obedience, by which himself and Successors are now dignified with the Title of Sovereign Princes of Caramania.
  Nothing could more endear a Ruler to his People than did this Action of THEODORE'S it seem'd so magnanimous a proof of Love to his Country, that a young Prince, in the full Vigour of those Desires which Loveliness creates, and every way accomplished to please the Fair, should, neglecting all the Beauties of the last, and the present Advantages he might have enjoy'd in the Choice of another Bride, sacrifice himself to a Princess much older than himself and who, when in her Bloom of Youth, was mistress of very few personal Charms, merely to free his Subjects from a Dependence which had long been uneasy to them that they thought they could never too much express their Sense of the Obligations they had to him Statues were in all publick Places erected 'to his honour! they almost adored him as a guardian God! nor could he appear in publick without the Drums, Trumpets, and other martial Mustek which accompany'd him, being drown'd in the louder Acclamations of the admiring Crowd, who hanging on his Chariot Wheels, seem'd to rend the very Skies with Cries of Joy! Liberty and THEODORE, was the word! Liberty and THEODORE, was all that could be heard. Nor was this Action of his look'd on with wondering Admiration by the Populace only those of the deepest penetration, and who made it most their business to pry into the Intrigues of State, could with all their search be able to ascribe no other Reason for it, than that which it had the appearance of so happy was this Prince in the few trusted by him, and so little is human Wisdom capable of fathoming the Heart.'
  But not to detain on the rack the Curiosity of my Reader, who by what I have said, cannot but imagine there was some other and more powerful motive for this Prince's Behaviour, than that which I have related, or than was publickly known I mall, in as brief a manner as the Subject will admit, give an account how very different from their seeming, were the real Inducements of THEODORE to act in the manner he had done.
  Being, as I have already said, possess'd of many valuable Accomplishments, of an illustrious Birth, descended by his Mother's side from the Kings of ancient Dacia, and by his Father's from the great ARSACES, and in several memorable Engagements against the Inhabitants of Mesopotamia and the Lesser Armenia having very much signaliz'd his Conduct and Courage, he was look'd on as a Prince who would hereafter make a very distinguishable figure in the world and his Alliance sought for by the neighbouring Nations, as the only Security from his superior Power. The several Princesses offer'd to him in marriage, and the equal Advantages which attended those Proposals, rendered him divided in his Sentiments, and being by his People press'd to make choice, he took a Journey to Anatolia, with a design to consult that Monarch, and be directed by him in the Affair.
  At his arrival, he receiv'd the Compliments of all the Grandees of that Court among the number of whom, was ADRASTUS, a Lord of eminent Birth and Merit, and highly in favour with his Royal Master which Considerations obliging the Prince to return his Visit in person, he was entertain'd in a manner becoming the Dignity of so illustrious a Guest But that which crown'd the Feast, and heighten'd every pleasure, was the presence of the lovely ISMONDA, Wife to ADRASTUS. The Heart of THEODORE, till now insensible of the Power of Beauty, felt a strange Alteration at the sight of her, a mixture of Delight and Pain difsus'd itself through every glowing Fibre, tumultuous Thrillings fill'd the Veins, and each warm Artery confess'd the new Desire! Unskill'd in Love, and all unstudied in the God's approach, and by what means he steals himself into the unguarded Soul, he knew not to what Guest he '.ad given room and innocently, at first, indulg'd the growing Anguish, nor thought what future Pains might be the consequence of the present Joy he found in gazing on so dangerous an Object. So lost was he in the admiration of her Charms, that had not MARMILLIO, a Caramanian Nobleman who from his Childhood had been bred up with him, had ever been his greatest Favourite, and had accompany'd him to Anatolia and in this Visit reminded him that it grew late, he might possibly have forgotten that Decorum which is always observ'd between Persons of short acquaintance, as was that he had with Adrastus, and by his long stay have occasion'd some Suspicions in him, which would have been of little advantage to the Passion he had entertain'd.
  Tis certain that the Discretion of MARMILLIO, who presently saw the Condition of his Prince, kept it from being perceivable by the Husband but the fair Occasion was too sensible of the Force of her Charms, to be deceiv'd in that manner she both knew and triumph'd in the Conquest she had made and tho' she had hitherto regarded her Husband with more Tenderness than is ordinarily found among Wives of Quality, yet the thoughts of being belov'd by so great and so lovely a Prince as THEODORE, rouzing all that was vain or ambitious in her Soul, made her in very great danger of swerving from that Duty, she had, till now, preserved with all imaginable strictness She saw herself admired by him, was pleas'd with the discovery, endeavour'd all she could to enhance the Esteem she had inspired, and how near such a Disposition is to betraying the Heart, too many fine Ladies by fatal Experience can testify.
  THEODORE, on the other side, was no sooner departed from the presence of his adored ISMONDA, than he was convinced by the pain he was in, what fort of Passion it was which he had entertain'd That purling Pleasure, which at her every little Word or Motion, ran trickling through his Veins, was now succeeded by a heavy Languor that sprightly Joy which so lately enliven'd all his Soul, the dear Inspirer absent, gave way to a sullen Gloom, and the once calm Composure of his Mind wholly chang'd to the reverse of what it had been. MARMILLIO, of all his numerous Train, was the only Person to whom he communicated his Sentiments nor did that Favourite omit making use of the Opportunity which this Confidante gave him, of more ingratiating himself to him, by soothing his new Passion. with a Prospect of Success and as he had, from the first View the Prince had of her, presently perceiv'd with what Emotions he regarded her, so was he not less watchful over the Behaviour of ISMONDA and being perfectly well versed in the humour of that Sex, and having experienced the various Foibles by which they become a prey to the insinuations of those who attempt their Honour, he imagin'd that he saw enough in this Lady to keep her Lover from despair and embellishing the real Opinion he had of her propensity to Love with all the pleasing additions his witty Invention could supply him with, indulg'd the enamour'd THEODORE with Ideas too satisfactory to be repell'd, and prevented him from making even an Effort to vanquish those new Desires which had taken possession of his Soul.
  He had after this many opportunities of seeing her for being as great a Favourite with HYANTHE, as her Husband was with the King, she was scarce ever from that Princess , and the transported THEODORE, under the pretence of paying his Compliments to the eldest Daughter of a Monarch, to whom he then own'd himself a Subject, indulg'd his Wishes with the more delightful Conversation of her lovely Attendant. The great number of Nobility which continually crowded the Drawingroom of this Princess, gave liberty to those of them, who were desirous of it, of withdrawing into Parties, and as this Court was full of Gallantry, almost every one had his particular Engagement It is not to be doubted but that THEODORE laid hold on every occasion which presented itself to him, of entertaining the Object of his Affectionsand one day having drawn her to a Window which jutted out a considerable way, and was separated from the rest of the Room by a kind of HalfAlcove he told her after some discourse on ordinary Affairs, looking on her at the same time with an unspeakable tenderness in his Eyes, that he had a Question to ask, which he passionately long'd to be resolv'd in, but that it was of such a nature, as he durst not mention without having first her promise of a faithful Answer. The grave and earnest manner in which these Words were delivered, created at first some little surprize in ISMONDA but presently recovering her self from it, and impatient for his meaning, assur'd him that whatever his demand was, she would reply to it with all imaginable Sincerity. It is then, Madam! said he, if amidst all that show of happiness, you seem to enjoy in a married State, you have never in secret wish that you had made less haste to enter into it, and in some measure regretted the loss of that Liberty a single Life affords? Tho' of all the Interrogatories which Invention could inspire, or Language form, answered she, this is of a kind the most foreign from my expectation yet since you have my promise, I will not scruple to inform you as much of the matter as my own Heart is sensible of. Yes I will confess, continued she, that tho' I have no reason to complain, either of the want of Honour or Tenderness in ADRASTUS I am not without some share of that too common Foible of Humanity, which makes us place less Value on the things we are in possession of, than those above our reach Whatever we may pretend, Hope is the most pleasing Passion of the Soul, and happy as I am, having enter'd into a State which deprives me of the power of expecting to be more so, I cannot entertain myself with those delightful Ideas, which were the Companions of my Virgin Thoughts. Then Madam! Cry’d the Prince, interrupting her with a visible transport in his Voice and Eyes you do not think ADRASTUS deserving the boundless Blessings he enjoys? I think him worthy of much more, resum'd she, than is in the power of ISMONDA to bestow but yet, continued she briskly, who knows but in spite of the little merit I am mistress of, Fortune and that unaccountable Caprice which sometimes rules the Heart, might, had I been in a condition to receive them, have favoured me with the Addresses of some Man superiour to ADRASTUS in Birth, in Power, in personal Perfections, and in every love-inspiring Grace: at least, added she, more seriously, I might have flatter d Imagination with such a hope, and grasp'd in Theory a Joy, the very shadow of which would have been preferable to the real Substance of that mean Content which I have made my Lot. If these words were not dictated by a Passion he had for the Person to whom they were address'd, he could take them for no other than the effects of her desire of engaging him He plainly saw, that if he was not belov'd by her, she took an infinite pleasure in believing herself belov'd by him, and whether it was to her Tenderness or Coquetry he was indebted for the condescensions she had made him, thought he had now a good opportunity of declaring himself, without any danger of incurring the Censure of being too presuming. Ah Madam! cry she, were what you say practicable in all Cases, where the reality of our Wishes is unattainable, how much oblig'd to you would every Lover, and in particular the despairing THEODORE be, for prescribing him so easy a way to Bliss? But alas, 'tis only the unprepossessed, and insensible, which can receive any benefit from your Instructions the Heart which can content itself with an imaginary enjoyment of its Desires, must not have for the Object of them a Perfection like that the adorable ISMONDA boasts. You, whose excelling Charms justly command the World, may at your pleasure dispose the Slaves as Fancy shall direct, but what relief for me? Ah! how shall I beguile the Tortures of a real Despair by an imaginary Joy? When in emboldened Thought I seem to travel o'er all your world of Beauty, and aim to taste a Bliss which even in Idea is too mighty to be born, will not curst Reason intervene between me and the insupportable Delight, reverse my fate, convert my promised Heaven to a certain Hell, and present the extatick Vision in another's Arms? 
  Can I indulge the rapturous Image of ISMONDA'S Charms, and not at the same time behold ADRASTUS in possession of them?
  Here ceas'd the Prince but ISMONDA, tho' she had wish'd, and from her first acquaintance with him, expected a Declaration of this nature, had hitherto been so little accustom'd to receive Gallantries, that she could not defend herself from the Con fusion with which this overwhelm' d her but the pleasure she conceiv'd at it, soon dissipating all the Remonstrances of shame or virtuous resentment, she affected to take all he had said to her only as raillery and the Effects of an overgay disposition, and answered him in this manner It must be confess'd indeed, said she, that you counterfeit the despairing Lover with so good a grace, that should a Woman be vain enough to believe you were in any danger of becoming such in good earnest, not ADRASTUS alone, but the noblest Husband in Anatolia would soon cease to be in a condition capable of creating Envy Since therefore, of all mankind, you have the most reason to hope every thing, expect every thing, those delightful Ideas we have been speaking of, can be no strangers to your Soul, unless you are one of those unreasonable ones whom nothing but the real Substance can content. Tho' the former part of what you have said, reply d the 'Prince, contains a Compliment to which I have no pretence, yet I cannot avoid subscribing myself to that Character you mention in the latter. Yes Madam! pursued he, tenderly pressing her Hand I acknowledge that I am one of those who cannot be satisfied with the shadow of a Blessing. Spirits may delight themselves in an intellectual Correspondence with each other, because it is all they are capable of enjoying but while the Soul is lodg'd in Flesh and Blood, Desires of a different nature will arise the Body claims its share of Joy, nor will permit the other to be blest alone. Bless me, cry'd ISMONDA, interrupting him, how suddenly is the turn of your Conversation alter'd! I thought, indeed, that Air of humble distance and despair was little tic conformable to your disposition this of the bold encroaching Lover is infinitely more natural, and shows you have been more used to bestow Compassion than stand in need of it yourself. Whatever I have been, resum'd he, I am now undone if want power to convince you that I have no other aim on Earth, than to receive from the divine ISMONDA. some tokens of it if therefore the professions I have made you, of a Passion the most violent that ever was, appear too great a Presumption, impute it to the extremity of that Anguish which a hopeless Flame creates, and which failing to move pity from the ador'd Object, in time consumes the Breast which harbours it. Well, well, said she, still with an ironical tone and gesture, when I am certain you are in a Condition, such as requires consolation, you shall find me not ill natur'd enough to refuse it. What progress do you demand, rejoined he will nothing less than a Dagger, a Bowl of Poison, or a Leap from some steep Promontory suffice? Yes I assure you, answer d she, laughing, I am for no such romantick flights Testimonies of a more modern fashion will content me. — But, continued she, perceiving two or three Ladies coming toward them, some other time we'll talk further on this matter. The Company by this time having joined them, the Conversation grew general, nor had he all that that day a second opportunity of speaking to her alone. He was, however, as he had good reason, perfectly satisfied with the progress he had made He very well knew ISMONDA was a Woman of too much penetration not to fee into his Designs, and her receiving the Declaration he had made her only as a Jest he took it, as really it was, as the method she made choice of, to encourage his Addresses, without seeming to do so. MARMILLIO, to whom he related the whole Conversation that had pass'd between them, was of the same opinion and his known Experience in the Affairs of Love, made the Prince very much depend on his Judgment and never had a Lover, while in a state of Expectation, greater reason to be satisfied with his Condition.
  The next time he saw her, was in the Gardens of the Palace Royal. She was lying on a green Bank by the side of a Fountain, extended at full length, her Head only a little reclin'd and leaning on her Arm, her Eyes seem'd to swim in tender Languishments, and an unusual Softness play'd about her Mouth, with gentle Sighs her snowy Bosom heav'd, triumphant Love wanton d thro' all her Air, and every Part proclaim'd the new Desire. Awhile, unseen by her, the amorous Prince stood gazing on her Charms, taking an infinite pleasure in contemplating her in this melting and love-inspiring Posture; specially when he reflected on the great probability there was, that it was occasion' d by the thoughts of him, and that one of these delightful Ideas they had been talking of at their last Interview, might now take up her Mind. At last, considering that if she should chance to lift up her Eyes and discover him, it would testify but little of that ardent Lover he had profess'd himself to be, contented with that distant Prospect, he drew near, and was on his knees before her, where he remain'd some moments without rousing her from her Reverie, so deeply was she plung'd in Thought, till no longer able to contain himself, he catch'd fast hold of one of her Hands, and putting it to his Mouth, seem'd to devour it with his eager Kisses. She started at the sudden Pressure, and her Surprize making her send forth a little Shriek, kept the Prince from using any efforts to prevent her rising from the posture she was in Good Heaven! cry'd she, how have I been lost in Thought! Might I presume to ask, rejoin'd THEODORE, what has been the Subject of that Contemplation, which has been so favourable to my Desires, of gazing on your Charms uninterrupted, answer'd? Yes, answer, I will make no scruple of reposing a Secret in your breast, which is of so much consequence to your self. Love has been the Theme of my Meditations and the happy Object of that Passion is no other than THEODORE. HOW, Madam, cry'd he, not able to contain the Ecstasy with which these words fill'd all his Soul is THEODORE the Object of ISMONDA'S Love? and do you confess it too—Is it possible that I am so divinely bless'd —O catch the joyful Sound, ye gentle Winds, and bear it up to Heaven there let it be registred, and every Saint and ministering Angel witness the glorious Promise, and put it past the lovely Maker's power ever to call it back! The Beauties of ISMONDA were at this Acclamation cover'd with a scarlet Blush, which was presently succeeded by a deadly Pale when the Prince approaching her with all the Transports of an embolden'd. Lover, .was about to take her in his Arms, and reap some fruits of that obliging Declaration she had made him Forbear, my Lord! said she, half turning from him, these Raptures are indeed a just Return for the Passion with which you are honour'd but alas! it is not ISMONDA who is worthy of receiving them. Your Merits have had the effect which it is ordinary for them to inspire, on a Heart which the Glory of subduing is sufficient to make yours exult with joy and vanity. As form, think of me no otherwise than as of a Wretch whom Fate has cast in a Sphere beneath Regard, as one who but at humble distance dares look up to you yet full of ardent Zeal for your Prosperity, wishes you still greater, happier, and more bless'd, if possible, than Heaven itself has power to make you. The Surprize which the Prince was in at the first part of this discourse, kept him from giving any interruption to it, till he found she had concluded and when she had, was divided in his Sentiments, whether he should answer to what she had said with an entreaty that she would explain what it was she meant, by telling him he had influenc'd a Heart more worth your return the obliging Softness with which she ended, in Endearments such as her Behaviour seem'd to demand from a Man less enamour'd, less transported with it than himself. After a Pause of about two moments, It is of little consequence to my Peace, said he, in whatsoever light my Merits may appear to the rest of the world, I wish to be agreeable but to ISMONDA and to prove you really wish to see me bless'd to that superlative degree you mention, you must believe 'tis only in your power to make me so Think not therefore, continued he, pressing a second time her unresisting Hand with greater Tenderness if possible, than before think not to put me off with the mean Joys which any other Beauty has the power to yield my high rais'd Wishes aim at the supremest Bliss, nor will be satisfied with aught but you! Your Love alone can give me perfect Happiness, your Cruelty alone can make me wretched It was with a visible Satisfaction in her Eyes, mix'd with a tender Melancholy, that ISMONDA receiv'd this Declaration and when she perceiv'd he had given over speakings I know not, answer d fie, how far the natural Vanity of my Sex might induce me to believe what you have said, had I not a Rival with whom 'tis Treason to dispute anything it is the Princess, Sir, HYANTHE, who claims all your Devoirs, nor would forgive me even a Wish to entertain you in this manner. I fee already, pursued she, after a little pause, and observing some Confusion in his Countenance the Weakness of my Influence appears the very Name of this too powerful Opposer robs me of all the Interest I had in you yet do you owe me some Acknowledgement for the Intelligence you might, perhaps, but for me, have long been uninform'd of the Happiness design'd you, and I will not lose one jot of those Privileges which are allow'd in such cases to Confidantes. Unjust ISMONDA, too lovely, cruel Trifler! resumed the Prince why do you take a barbarous pleasure in rallying the pains you give? Were what you say concerning that Princess real, too well are those dear Eyes of yours acquainted with their force, to fear a Rival, or suspect your Lover's Truth. This is an Invention forg'd, but to delay those Joys which this bless'd Opportunity seems to invite
  But thus, he, catching her in his Arms, and bearing her perforce into a little Grotto near the Fountain thus will I disappoint the measures thou wouldst take thus put an end to all the little Artifices which fear or modesty might tempt thee to make trial of, and be indeed as bless'd as thou hast lately wish'd me.
  Tis certain that this Prince's desires were now grown too violent for restraint by any common means, and nothing less than those ISMONDA took, could have oblig'd him to defer one moment the perpetration of his Passion. Perceiving herself on the very brink of falling a Sacrifice to a Passion, which she was not yet certain, was enough establish'd in his Heart to assure her of his Constancy and Gratitude, and that nothing , she could say was of any efficacy to move him from his Purpose she snatch'd a Dagger, which he always wore by his fide, and putting the Point of it to her Breast, protested by all the Gods of Caramania, that she would that instant dye it with her Life's Blood, if he would not fit calmly down and listen to what she had to utter. She spoke this with so resolute and determin'd an Air, that the astonish'd THEODORE trembled lest she should execute what she had manag'd, before he could convince her of his readiness to obey her and retiring three or four Paces from her, threw himself upon his Knees, entreating she would throw away a Weapon so unbecoming her Sex, and the Power she had over him. No, said six, 'tis necessary that I keep myself thus arm'd, to prevent that which I am about to confess, from having an effect upon you, contrary to what  am willing to permit. Know then, continued she, with a deep Sigh that from the first moment you arriv'd at the Anatolian Court, my Heart has been your Prize my Husband, you know, with some other Noblemen, met you on the Frontiers, and I with many other Ladies stood at a Window to behold the Entrance of a Prince, whose same had fill'd us all with admiration. Not an Eye, but what seem'd fix'd and riveted upon your Charms but all my Soul flew into mine, to take the bright, the dangerous Image in when next I saw you, 'twas at my own Apartment, you did ADRASTUS the honour of a Visit, and by that second View I was entirely lost acknowledge that never Woman loved with a greater transcendency of Passion than that I feel for you, and it is perhaps more owing to the Zeal of my Affection that I refuse giving you the Proof you ask of it, than to my Virtue, my Duty, or any other consideration whatever. Too much, O Prince! I love you, to dare give a loose to tenderness without a Certainty, that I shall always be permitted to do so should I indulge your present Wishes and my own, how should  be able to support she dreadful Separation, which must soon attend this short-lived Heaven of felicity? — Are not all the Princesses of Asia Impatient to call you Husband? Are you not come to Anatolia, merely to consult its King which of them shall have the preference in your Choice the great decision made, happy Caramania will again receive its Lord, and poor ISMONDA be abandoned to all the miseries which Despair creates. A Flood of Tears here stop'd the farther Progress of her Words, and gave the impatient THEODORE the opportunity of replying in this manner After this rapturous discovery, said he, think me not so stupidly insensible of the Blessing it affords, or so ungrateful for the Bounty, that on any terms I could be obliged to quit Anatolia for ever. No, most enchanting, most adorable ISMONDA, I should look on all the Hours which cruel necessity enforces me to pass in absence from you, as so many vacancies in Life and soon as the important plagues of State were over, hast to thy Breast, there lull my Cares to rest, riot in Love, and in the present Joy lose all the memory of the past disquiet.——
Or, continued he, if you suspect my Constancy, be the Partner of my Journey, leave Anatolia and this too long happy Husband, and content to share with me my Bed and Power. Alas! interrupted she, what wild Chi-mæras does distracted Passion form! I know too well of what dangerous consequence to Love are Time and Absence, to trust my Heart with him who must abide their trial —Much less can I so far consult Self-interest, as to enter into any measures for my own Security, which must be the destruction of your Peace, your Glory, and perhaps your Life. I have already told you, that HYANTHE loves you, she will soon be offer'd to you in marriage by her Father should you refuse this Princess, and at the same time take with you her Woman, would not all Anatolia, commanded by their King, and urg'd to Vengeance by the wrong'd ADRASTUS, be arm'd against you? Would not their Forces like a Torrent pour upon your Country, depopulate your Cities, lay your Palaces in ashes, and drive you out a wretched Exile to mourn in some fad solitude the Ruins you had caus'd? No, THEODORE, there is but one way left which can secure our Love you must marry with HYANTHE, and under the pretence of friendship and fidelity to her, I unsuspected may exchange the Court of Anatolia for that of Caramania. The confidence and favour with which that Princess graces me, will make it not seem strange, that I can leave a Husband, at least for a time, to accompany so Royal and Kind a Mistress , nor will ADRASTUS, howe'er uneasy, dare to murmur at the Choice I make.
  Nothing that the Prince had said, could appear less consonant to Reason than did this Proposal seem to him He thought it so foreign from the Principles, not only of the Passion she had profess'd, but also from Nature itself, that a Woman could of her own accord desire to share the Possession of the Man she lov'd with another, that for a great while he was able to bring out no more than, Are you in earnest, Madam?
  Can you pretend to love, yet advise me to marry HYANTHE? Must I to prove my constancy be false? what in coherency of Thoughts are these! In such kind of Interrogatories did he express the Amazement he was under, till she again repeating almost the same Arguments she had before made use of, to demonstrate the necessity there was for his acting in the manner she advis'd, and that no other means could secure either the Love, the Reputation, or the Interest of both he was half persuaded to be of her mind, and confess'd that in forming this Design, she had testified a Passion more heroick, and more delicate than ever before he had any notion of. In fine, she at last obtained a promise from him, to accept of the Proposals he knew would be made him by the Father of HYANTHE, and oblig'd him to content himself with her's, that as soon as ever that Affair was concluded on, she would deny him nothing.
 Thus they parted, and when MARMILLIO, to whom the Prince, the moment he came home related every thing that had pass'd, had a little considered on the Advantages which might be hoped for in an Alliance with this Monarch he encourag'd him to it by all means, prais'd the masculine Temper of ISMONDA, who, free from the Vanity and Tenaciousness of her Sex, could consent to see the Man most dear to her in a Rival's Arms, in terms so warm and elegant, that he was almost doubtful if his Favourite regarded her not with the same Eyes he did and judging by that start of Jealousy, which just then rose in his Soul, how terrible it must be to suffer an invader in that tender point, he could not tell how to reconcile it to reason, that ISMONDA could have the real Passion for him she profess'd. This Reflection making him grow pensive on the sudden, MARMILLIO entreated to be told the meaning of it? which the Prince freely declaring, he endeavoured to ease him of the Apprehensions he labour'd under, in these or the like Terms 

I hope, my Royal Lord! said he, that there is little need of my using any Arguments to convince you, that I better know the Duty of a Subject than to dispute any thing with my Prince, or that I look on the Heart of ISMONDA, having receiv'd your Image, as a sacred Temple which is not but with Reverence to be approached but as to the unjust Suspicions you conceive of her, permit me to set your judgment right should I or any other Man attempt to rival you in her Enjoyment, the motive which would induce her yielding, must be Love necessity, or even convenience could not be the Plea it would certainly, therefore, denote the utmost indifference in you to endure it, much more to approve of it. But the Case is widely different in your becoming the Husband of HYANTHE the Love which ISMONDA is possess'd of for you, cannot be gratified without it she has no other pretence to accompany you, she must shortly lose you, 'tis to avoid being separated from you, that she chooses to have you marry'd, and would rather see you in another's Arms sometimes, than be certain she no more could hold you in her own. Tis with ease we endure a conjugal Rivalship, because we are pretty certain that those Endearments are more the Effect of Duty and Formality, than of Love nor consequently can ISMONDA suffer greater disquiet to behold you the Husband of HYANTHE, than it is to you to know her the Wife of ADRASTUS. By these kind of Reasonings he at last entirely overcame the ill humour of the Prince, and fully convinc'd him that it was both for the advantage of his Love and Interest to match himself in the manner she had counseled. Several days pass'd over in this manner, without any thing happening, which cither advanc'd or diminish'd the hopes of this enamour'd Prince for tho' he lost no Opportunity of entertaining the lovely Object of his Affections, and omitted nothing which .he thought might prevail on her to consent to what both of them seem'd to wish with equal ardency, yet was she still resolute and the more violently he enforc'd his pressures, the more severely did she repulse them  At length, the long expected Proposition was made, the King of Anatolia acquainted his illustrious Guest, that he desired nothing so much, as that he should become his Son and that since he thought fit to ask his Advice in the Choice of a Wife, the Person. he should recommend to him should be no other than HYANTHE, who he knew was highly satisfied with his good Qualities, and that he would give in Dowry with her, a full discharge for ever of that Tribute which had hitherto been paid by the Princes of Caramania to the Crown of Anatolia. The secret Reward which ISMONDA was to give for the compliance of this Prince, made him answer in such a manner, as was very agreeable to the King's Desires not the least Objection being made on either side, every thing was immediately concluded on, and a Day appointed for the Celebration of the Marriage. Never was impatience equal to that of THEODORE, to bear to ISMONDA the News that her Commands were now fulfill'd, and to demand the glorious recompense of his obedient Love and that Lady, who with the Princess had been conceal'd in a little Drawing room, joining to the King's Closet, on purpose to hear in what manner he receiv'd the Offer, made an excuse, as soon as she found the Prince was about to take his leave, to retire to her own Apartment not doubting but the haste he made, was wholly on her account, and there prepared herself to receive him with all the tenderness she had promis'd, or that he could expect to find in her. Never had the God of tender Wishes a Sacrifice more ardent, or attended with a greater Zeal, than that now offered him by this enamour'd Pair each strove to outvie the other in the soft Devotion both yielded, and both conquer'd in their turn.
  The Gratification of his Passion made the transported THEODORE in so good a humour, humour, that he found it no difficulty to dissemble as much Tenderness for HYANTHE, as was necessary for the concealment of his Passion for ISMONDA and with so much conduct did these happy Lovers behave themselves to each other, both in their Conversations in publick, and in the management of those secret meetings, which gave them the full Satisfaction of their mutual Desires, that the Intrigue between them, was never so much as suspected, even by those who had most reason to carry an observant Eye, HYANTHE and ADRASTUS. 
  The Day being arriv'd for the Solemnization of the Wedding, it was performed with the utmost magnificence all the Nobility of both Sexes endeavour'd to appear in the most grand manner that their Abilities would permit the. Ladies especially, forgot no Ornaments which might add a Lustre to their natural Charms but ISMONDA, like a Star of superior Magnitude, eclips'd the Shine of every other Beauty that sweet Contentment which now sat smiling in her Eyes, improving all her Air, and heightening every Grace, rendered her not only more lovely than all the contemporary Fair-ones, but also excelling what even herself had been used to appear Enjoyment had been so far from lessening the Ardors of THEODORE, that never had he languish'd with more strong or vehement Desires than at this moment, and she who was perfectly well vers'd in the Language of the Eyes, found enough in his to assure her, that the yet untasted Pleasure he was to reap that Night with HYANTHE, would but faintly compensate for the want of those which were in her power to bestow. And exulting in the Triumph that she alone was mistress of his Soul, easily absolv'd her Fate, for the necessity there was, for their common Interest, that his Body must, at sometimes, be elsewhere devoted.
  Poor HYANTHE, who had also the most tender affection for the happy THEODORE, contented herself with the Complaisance he paid her, imagining the little warmth of his Caresses were only owing to the fault of Nature, and that all he knew of Love, he felt for her. All Parties, therefore, had something to delight themselves with, and every one being satisfied in their several Circumstances, made it not their business to search into the private Behaviour of each other.
  The Time being at hand, in which it was thought proper the Prince should return to Caramania, the punctual ISMONDA, counterfeiting the extremest Friendship to the Princess, entreated she would permit her to attend her to her new Sovereignty, and telling her, she should be the most unhappy happy Woman on earth, to be left behind her that in her journey, and in a place to whose Customs and Manners she was wholly a stranger, she might probably wish for a Companion, to whom she could impart her Mind with that freedom which she had been accustom'd to do to her and conjured her to grant the Request she made, of being permitted to go with her that the Princess was both surpriz'd and pleas'd at so uncommon a proof of Fidelity and Love, as this had the appearance of. And is it possible, said she, that Friendship can carry one to greater lengths than Love? Can you so easily be prevail' d on to quit the Arms of a Husband whom you love, and by whom you are so well belov'd, only to follow a Princess who has it not in her power to give you any Blessings proportion' d to those you leave behind? Your Service, replied she, O most Excellent and Royal HYANTHE, I always look'd on as the supremest Blessing of my Life and while possess'd of that, can know no want of any other Happiness As for ADRASTUS, if his great Employments will not permit him wholly to take leave of Anatolia, the distance between the Lands is not so great, but that he may sometimes pay us a Visit at the Caramanian Court or when you are settled there, and the knowledge of your Goodness makes you as dear to your Subjects there, as justly here you are, ISMONDA may be the better spared, and I may then return to ADRASTUS a Wife who .prefers him to every thing but her Love and Duty to her Princess.
  These kind of Discourses were too obliging to the Princess, for her to refuse the Purport of them and in spite of all the opposition which ADRASTUS could make, it was resolved that ISMONDA should attend her to Caramania. 
  Thus did this Prince purchase the Goodwill of his Subjects, and the Admiration of the whole World, by the same means which secured to himself the Enjoyment of his Wishes, and at his return receiv'd the Thanks of an adoring People for an imaginary Obligation being look'd on as the Father of his Country, for an Action only influenced by Self-satisfaction, and in which he had no other View than such as were very distant from deserving the Trophies erected to it.
  But having done so much merely for the lake of ISMONDA, who would not believe his Soul so wholly devoted to her, that it could have left room for any other Idea yet, dear as she was to him, the Love of Variety intervened, and made him wish to taste new Joys in a young Beauty's Arms, whose Name was LUTETIA, the Daughter of a Caramanian Lord, and brought by him to Court, to attend the Princess on her first arrival. His Solicitations had the effect it was usual for' them to inspire, nor could those Charms from which all the Tyes of Duty and premier Engagements to one of the best of Husbands, were too weak to defend the Heart of ISMONDA, fail of gaining a Conquest over one so unexperienc'd, so unprejudiced, as was that of this young Al aid. Soon did the eternally successful THEODORE triumph in her Virgin Favours, and as soon, alas! did he forget the Bliss the Image of ISMONDA now return'd with former force into his Soul, and reproach'd him in Idea, for having aim'd at Joys with any other Object he regretted his Inconstancy, could not forgive himself for having once been false to her, who of all her Sex alone had the power of inspiring him with a serious Passion, and for whose Love he thought himself so much obliged, that the Service of his whole Life was too little to requite the Blessing and of that burning, that impatient Longing which lately fill'd all his Faculties for the innocent LUTETIA, nothing was now remaining but a cool Pity for the Ruin he had involv'd her in.
  The unhappy Victim of Desire immediately perceiv'd to what a wretched state her easy yielding, and her fond belief had reduced her yet still loving him with an unbated Passion, she forbore either to reproach or to complain of his Unkindness, nor but to Heaven and the unpitying Stars reveal'd her Weight of Anguish till finding in herself that common Consequence which attends Raptures such as she too lavishly had indulg'd, the terror of approaching Shame, and the just rage of an offended and dishonour'd Father, made her resolve to intreat the Prince to find some Expedient which might shelter her from the impending Storm but he so carefully avoided all discourse with her in private, that tho' she watch'd with all imaginable diligence, she could never find an opportunity of speaking to him. It would be but impertinent to trouble my Reader with any repetition of the Lamentations she made, or the secret Miseries of her tormented Mind it is very easy to conceive what a young Creature, thus ruin'd, thus abandon'd, yet still loving the dear Undoer, must sustain I shall only say, she wanted nothing but Courage, to send herself at once from the Vale of Wretchedness into which her Inadvertency had' plung'd her, and disappoint the Infamy which the condition she was in was shortly to bring upon her. But whether it were, that she could not resolve to leave the World while THEODORE was in it, or that Life still flatter'd her with some faint Hopes that he might again return to her Embraces, and bless her with renew'd Endearments, she. could not, or she would not y to that Remedy to which. the Desperate have usually recourse But still revolving in her Mind some means to communicate her Condition to him, who alone had the power of rendering it supportable and still finding all the Efforts she made for that purpose ineffectual! she at last took up a Resolution to write, and in these terms related the Die tastes of her Love, her Grief, and her Despair... 
To the most Charming of his Sex, the accomplish’d THEODORE, Prince of Caramania. 
 Is it because you are my Sovereign, that you imagine yourself absolv'd for my undoing?——Is it a part of your Prerogative to ruin and betrays?--Can Royalty convert those Acts to Virtue, which in another Man wou'd be look'd on as the extremest Degrees of  Vice?—Oh! No; Power is not a  Sanction for Oppression. The Duty of a Prince is to redress, not offer Injuries —Where but to the Throne should we appeal for justice, or for Mercy——How wretched, then is poor LUTETIA’S Cafe, wrong'd by the only Man who should protect her Innocence, or revenge her Ruin ?———Oh Prince! have you slot a thousand times wore you lov'd me, that you would always do so, and that my Peace, my Interest, my Reputation, should ever be valued by you as your own yet have you not abandon' d me to all the Miseries of Despair and Shame! To the just Upbraidings of the censorious World, and the more terrible Remora's of a guilty Mind Wild with unsated Love, with Tenderness abus'd, with the Horrors of approaching, sure, irremediable Woe, I suffer more than Words can speak, or Thought unfeeling it, conceive yet arc you the cruel, lovely Author of it unmov'd, untouch'd, and pityless of all this mighty Load of Anguish—But lest you should plead Ignorance of the most poignant part of my Misfortune, know I am with child and as if it were not a sufficient Curse to wear your faithless Image in my Mind, Fate has decreed me to bear another, which soon will become past concealment, and grow an undeniable Witness of its Mother's Shame.——Wretch that I am, to what must I have recourse, by what Replies silence the just Reproaches of an enrag'd, disgrac'd, and troubled Father! How excuse my Crime to Heaven and HYANTHE! How answer even the unhappy Product of your dissembled Raptures, whose guiltless Cries will every moment upbraid me for giving it a Life, whose Portion must be only Infamy! Oh! I am lost for ever— undone in every Circumstance yet let those Powers who know my Soul be judge, if all that can attend a Crime like mine, here, or hereafter, is half as dreadful as the shock of being by you forsaken. Bless'd with your Love, I could have defy'd my Fate, and with a Smile met every other Woe. Charm me then, once more, with Love restor'd if ever I was worthy those soft Endearments which made Guilt so pleasing, I still am so nor Age, nor Sickness has deform'd my Bloom my Eyes, tho now o'erflow'd with Tears, would, at your presence, regain their usual Lustre, and that Vivacity, you have so often praised, again return, and quicken all my Air.
If I am chang'd in aught from what I was, tis you, O Prince! have made me so, and when you please can restore me to myself, and to those blissful Moments, which assur'd me nothing could give a greater Satisfaction to the royal THEODORE, than to know I was his Faithful, and most Passionately Devoted
LUTETIA. 
  P. S. If urg'd by Griefs too mighty to be long sustain'd, I do a desperate Murder on myself and the unhappy Unborn, 'let not my Rashness, but your own city, bear the blame since it is much 'easier to live by your relenting, than to seek a Shelter in the Grave from your Inhumanity. Once more I beg you to compassionate my Miseries, and that you will no longer shun a Wretch who 'cannot be but yours.
  She had written this Epistle some days, and kept it in her Pocket, without being able to get an opportunity of delivering it to him, having no Person in the world to whose Trust she dare commit a Paper of so much consequence At last Fortune afforded one as ample, as the miserable Circumstances she was in could hope. HYANTHE being a little indispos'd, kept her Chamber and the Prince coming to visit her, at a time when none but LUTETIA happen'd to be in the Room, that unfortunate Lady made a pretence of opening the Door for him as he was going out, and stipp'd the Letter into his hands with these Words I conjure you, my Lord! said she, to read that, and afford some Answer to her who is dying with your Unkindness. This not being a place in which she could expect him to make her any reply, the waited not for it but immediately retir'd to her Seat at the foot of the Bed, where the Princess was reclin'd, and by that means lost the sight of that Confusion with which the Prince was cover a at receiving a Salutation, which he had long fear'd to meet.
  Tis certain, that tho' he .had but small remains of that Passion, which can properly be call'd Love, he had Honour and Good nature enough to make him extremely commiserate her Distress, and felt a Concern for her, which might very well bear the Name of the most tender Friendship fain he would have talk'd to her, and let her have known, by word of mouth, how great a share. he bore in her Misfortune but the Fears he was in, that a private Interview might by some accident be discovers, and occasion some Suspicion of the Truth, especially when the Condition she was in should be made known, prevented him. He equally dreaded the Jealousy of HYANTHE, or ISMONDA, the one, Interest of State oblig'd him to dissemble with and the other, his still sincere Affection made him fearful to offend. These Apprehensions, mix'd with his Regard for LUTETIA, and the Uncertainty in what manner he should behave toward her, kept his Thoughts in a perpetual rack, till after many Resolutions form'd and rejected, he at length pitch'd oh one, which promis'd him some ease fibril that Dilemma he had long been involved in. 
  MARMILLIO, who on all occasions, particularly in those of his Amours, was always his Confidant and Advises, Was the Person to whom he apply'd himself hi this juncture  and having made him acquainted with the whole Affair, and show'd him the Letter which LUTETTA had written, he order'd him to wait for that Lady, to bear to her his most tender Respects, and excuse his not coming to her in Person, because it might occasion some Jealousy in HYANTHE who, he bid him say, had already given some hints of a propensity in her Nature to that Passion. He desired him also to make use of his utmost Efforts to persuade her to retire from Court for some time, and that nothing should be wanting to make whatever Solitude she should chuse agreeable. 
  It was with this greatest reason that the Prince always made choice of this Favourite for the management of such Affairs, because he was not only extremely faithful to the Trust repos'd in him, but had also a ready Wit and Invention capable of carrying on almost any Enterprise he took delight in, and had a Genius naturally turn'd to Love Intrigues. He assur'd the Prince, he would do in every thing as he had directed and that he did not doubt but to plead so successfully with LUTETIA as to make her accede to every thing they desired of her and also more contented in her Mind, than she had been of a long time.
  There is a great deal owing to the good Inclination of the Person employ'd. MARMILLIO went about this Affair with so much Resolution to accomplish it, that he could not fail of doing so, and by tender and obliging Words, at first combating with the Tears and Impatiencies of the unfortunate LUTETIA, by degrees brought her to listen to his Arguments with Moderation, and at last to think her Circumstances less wretched than she had believ'd them. He astur'd her that she was as much as ever the Object of the Prince's Affection, that there was nothing he so ardently long'd for, as an opportunity to convince her of it, but that the present situation of Affairs would not permit it. Time, said this subtle Insinuator, will convince the sweet LUTETIA, that nothing is so dear to Prince THEODORE as the possession of her Beauties, and that he but denies himself the present Bliss, till he can bring about some Designs, which may secure him hereafter the uninterrupted Felicity—Had you seen, continued he, with how much Agony of Soul he express'd himself on this occasion, you would not blame but pity him. Tell her, said he to me, 
 MARMILLIO, that all that her own soft Thoughts can form of Love, I feel for her that in my unextinguishable Passion, there is all the Tenderness of Woman, blended with the most vigorous and burning Energy of eager Wishing, that e'er enflam'd the Heart of Man.—But, pursued MARMILLIO, to tell you what he said, is but to make you half sensible of what he would have you know—to do justice to his Meaning, I must be able to speak in the manner he did, must assume a Softness which my Voice is incapable of wearing must teach my Eyes to languish, and every Feature to declare the God with which he is so powerfully inspir'd.—I am, alas! an unfit Proxy to reveal what 'tis he suffers, and how much he loves and if your own Imagination makes not up for what I am deficient in, my Prince can never appear what in reality he is.
  By these kind of Discourses, she was won to believe herself as happy, as she, indeed, was miserable and now employing het whole time in Artifices to conceal her growing Shame, and to contrive some plausible excuse for leaving the Court, she prepar'd herself to go to a private Lodging, which the Care of MARMILLIO provided for her, wholly satisfy'd with the Assurances he every day continu'd to give her of the Prince's inviolable Affection, and fending by the mouth of that Favourite, every thing she would have him know.
  Thus was LUTETIA satisfy'd, and the Prince reliev'd from those Apprehensions which had been so uneasy to him, that the Fondness or Despair of that unhappy Creature might drive her to some extravagances of Behaviour, which might betray the whole Affair between them, either to HYANTHE, pr to her whose Displeasure more he dreaded, ISMONDA but little did MARMILLIO think, that while he was serving his Prince, he was involving himself in Difficulties, from which not as his Wit and Address could disengage him for a long time. 
  Being, as I have before observ'd, of an amorous Disposition, he was scarce ever without an Intrigue, and sometimes had three or four upon his hands at once. Among the number of those for whom he had entertain'd a Desire, was IRENES young Lady, whose. Brother had been first Minister of State to the Father of THEODORE, and tho' somewhat less in favour than he had been, was yet a very considerable Man both in the Court, and in the Army. It was not without the utmost Labour, long Assiduities, repeated Vows and Protestations, and a solemn Contract of Marriage, that MARMILLIO had prevail'd on her to allow him the gratification of his Passion but nor thing being farther from his Intentions, than to make good his Promises, he always found some pretence for deferring the Celebration of their Nuptials, whenever press'd to it by her. Finding herself, at length, in the same condition with the unfortunate LUTETIA, she renew'd her Desires of becoming his Wife with greater force than ever but he had artifice enough to turn those very Reasons she made use of, against what slid desired he told her, that should the Marriage now be solemniz'd, it would be a plain Demonstration that there had been told great an Intimacy between them and that it would be infinitely more for her Reputation to keep the whole Affair a Secret still continuing to assure her, that as soon as she was deliver'd of her Burden, he would perform what she required, and he had sworn. He enforce'd these Arguments with so much Wit and Eloquence, and accompany'd them with so great a show of Tenderness, that had the Person to whom they were apply'd, been infinitely more practis'd in Deceit than was IRENE, she might have imagin'd it sincere. The pains he took to make her easy, were not, however, so much the Effect of Love as Fear, he dreaded the great Power of her Brother, and the Influence which the Complaint of a Woman of IRENE'S Quality and Character would have on the Senate, in cafe she should make a publick claim of the Contract he had made and being in his Nature a marriage hater, and the Desires he had for IRENE fully satiated by repeated and unrestrain'd Enjoyments, nothing could appear to him a greater misfortune than to be compell'd to become her Husband.
  To add to the Indifference he already had for this Lady, there was lately arriv'd at the Court of Caramania a young Beauty, With whom he fell passionately in love, as much as that Passion can be call'd so, which tends to the Ruin of the Object admired. ARILLA, for that is her Name, has Charms which might almost justify Inconstancy, and render the Complaints of the Forsaken of no effect, where Youth and Nature are to decide the Contest. Often had MARMILLIO lov'd, but ne'er, till now, experienc'd with how much force the God can actuate and finding from the excessive Modesty of this new Charmer, not the least Shadow of a Hope to countenance his Designs, he grew almost mad Sleep was a stranger to his Nights, and Peace forsook his Days Yet not being of a humour on which Despair could easily seize, he resolv'd not to desist till he had try'd every way which Love and Wit had the power of inspiring in the most determin'd Heart, He had, indeed, this to encourage his Attempts, that he perceiv'd he was not disagreeable to her that he had only Virtue to oppose, and no premier Inclination to another, or Aversion to him, made war against his Hopes he' imagin'd therefore, that what Modesty and Virgin Bashfulness refus'd to grant, if seiz'd by amorous Violence would not appear a Crime too great to be forgiven having often in mind that saying of a famous English Poet, which Language he understood perfectly well
Force is the last Relief which Lovers find, And is the best Excuse for Womankind. 
  His Experience in the humour of that Sex inform'd him, that many of them are too prudent to resent what is past retrieve, and that most are more willing to pardon a Presumption of that kind when done, than to give their Consent to the committing it. The gentleness of ARILLA'S Behaviour made him half astur'd she was of this Temper, and that he had nothing worse to sear from her after the perpetration of his Desires, than he now sustain'd in the vain Prosecution of them.
  Having fix'd himself in this Resolution, all he wanted was an opportunity to put it in practice but tho' he scarce lost fight of her one moment, and still observ'd her Motions whether at Court or at her own Apartment, he could not for some days herself alone, some impertinent Interruption still broke off the preparatory Discourses he Was entertaining her with, to bring about his Purpose but at length his zealous Attendance met the Reward for which 'twas paid. The Prince and Princess being gone to take the Air together, attended by a great Retinue, none of the Maids of the Bedchamber, who were in waiting, happen'd to be left at home, but ARILLA who, desirous of indulging her own Meditations, had pretended an Indisposition, and desired to be excus'd from her Attendances She had shut herself into the Princess's Closet, designing to pass some hours in private when MARMILLIO, whose Eyes were never off her, having observ'd what had past'd, took the boldness to knock at the door Little imagining who it was, and unsuspecting the instant Danger with which she was threatened she readily open'd it, and gave entrance to the Man who came prepar'd to ruin her. The Resolution with which he had arm'd himself for this Encounter, gave a greater fierceness to his Air, than, till this moment, he had ever presum'd to approach her with which, together with his making fast the Door, as soon as he was admitted, gave the timorous Maid some apprehensions of hi Designs What is it you mean, MARMILLIO SAID she, in a trembling and scarce intelligible accent. To do Justice, reply'd he, to the burning Passion of my Soul, which I too much have trifled with, and which will now no longer be deny'd. Yield then, pursu'd he, looking on her with Eyes that seem'd to flame with raging and impatient Love, nor rob the Joys I come determined to possess of half their Sweetness, by a vain Resistance, and unavailing Coyness. You will not sure, cry'd she, more frightened, have recourse to brutal Force?
Consider where we are, and who I am, a Maid of Quality, and under the immediate Care of Royal Power?——Not all the Powers, interrupted he, catching her in his Arms, of Heaven and Earth shall now deter MARMILLIO from his purpose—I love, and cannot live without you—give then to the Winds thy Fears, thy Scruples, and all the Foes of Pleasure indulge the ravishing Delights which soft Desire affords—let Love and Nature loose, and take thy share of Joy, suffer me to be bless'd alone. He accompany'd these Words with Actions, such as left her ho room to doubt if her continuing to refuse would be of much consequence to her Preservation and tho she was far from yielding, she wanted, in this surprizing exigence, Spirit and Resolution sufficient to oppose in any manner which could oblige him to give over his Attempt. In the midst of Tears, Tremblings, faint Entreaties, and Reproaches, He accomplished his Design, and not till he had had snatch'd the guilty Bliss, gave himself leisure to reply to what she said.
  But when secure of his Desires, and possess'd of all his wild Passion aim'd at, he then exerted all those Arts which had entitled him to so many Successes with the Fair, to defend the Violence he had been guilty of.'— He employ'd that Wit and Eloquence which Men generally make use of, to melt the unwary Maid to grant what they wish to argue her into a Belief, that she not only ought to pardon, but also to approve of what he had done, as the extremes! Testimony of his unbounded Passion, which would not suffer any Considerations, not even those of offending her, than which, he said, nothing could be more formidable, to be an obstruction to the attainment of his Hopes. The hurry and confusion of her Thoughts, left her as little the power of making any Answer to him, as his Impatiencies had permitted him before and he went on uninterrupted, with his Persuasions, vowing not to leave her till she had assur'd him of his Pardon which, at last, reflecting that what had happen'd was now irremediable, she granted, and without a second Ravishment, suffer'd him to take a full Enjoyment of those Charms which before had bless'd him but by halves.
  The Cravings of tumultuous Passion being thus appeas'd, and Tranquility now settled in that Breast, which lately swell'd with the most disturbed Emotions, cool Recollection had liberty to resume its place arid bethinking himself, that if the Princess should return and surprize him in this privacy with her Woman, it would give occasion for Discourses, such as were no way agreeable to his present Circumstances, and the appearance of that Fidelity it improv'd him to behave with to IRENE, who was not yet retir'd from Court, and he very well knew kept a jealous Eye on all his Actions he therefore took his leave of the undone ARILLA, giving her the liberty of indulging Meditation on what had past, while he, gay and triumphant on the easy Conquest, retired to taste the Joys of BACCHUS, who, with the God of Love, are the only Deities he acknowledges.
  It was in the time that he was carrying on this double Intrigue with IRENE and ARILLA, that he was employ'd by the Prince to negotiate his Affair with LUTETIA and being known to be very often with that Lady both in publick and private, his Innocence in that matter rendering him less cautious in being seen with her, than with those whom he visited on his own account, the whole Court gave her to him for a Mistress. Some imagin'd he solicited her on honourable Terms, but others who were better acquainted with his Disposition, and had also some suspicion of her Condition, made no doubt, but that she had yielded to his Suit, on Terms less advantageous to herself than Marriage. Among' the number of those whom these Discourses reach'd, were IRENE and ARILLA few Women are possess'd of greater share of Pride, Spirit, and Passion, than the former of these Ladies, which, join'd to the Power which the Contract between them gave her over him, and the Circumstances to which her yielding to his Pressures had reduc'd her, made her look upon this imaginary Wrong as the most insupportable Indignity, the common Chat being confirm'd to her by some busy People, who pretended to be in the Secret, either to make themselves pass for Persons Of an extraordinary Intelligence, or guessing how the Affair stood between her and MARMILLIO, talk'd in this manner on purpose to see how she would resent it. She grew perfectly outrageous, swore she wou'd have Justice or Revenge and happening to Come in to visit her just in the moment When her tempestuous Passion was work'd Up to the greatest height that mortal Fury can arrive at, she fell on him with Imprecations and Reviling, such as both terrify'd and astonish'd him but the extremity of her Rage, rendering what she said scarce intelligible, and mentioning only that she was ill treated and neglected for a Rival's fake,
Without naming LUTETIA conscious Guilt made him imagine it was any other than ARILLA that meant, and entreating her to hear him Vas beginning to swear !he never had a Thought of Tenderness for that young Lady, and that the devoirs he paid her, were only on the account of a dear friend, who was passionately hi Love With her, and had employ'd him to solicit his Cause.— Can the divine IRENE, said tie to her, with the most tender Airy be so insensible of her Power of Charming, as to imagine the Man, whom she 'vouchsafes to bless, can throw away a Wish on the' mean Beauties which ARILLA boasts? ARILLA CRIED, interrupting him, What mean you by ARILLA To you hope by a poor Equivocation to evade my just Resentment and by protesting your Innocence of a Crime of which you are not suspected, silence the Accusations of that wherein you are guilty?.—— Inconstant, ingrateful, and perfidious. Man! too well you know 'tis not ARILLA, but LUTETIA, is the Object of my Jealousy. Now was MARMILLIO, indeed, confounded tho' Wholly free from the Cr.ime with which he was charg'd on her account, he was now sensible, on Reflection, that he had behav'd in a manner such as might .very well make him appear otherwise, and having thrown away on ARILLA'S score the only Excuse his Invention could supply him with, had nothing now to allege in vindication of his frequent Visits to LUTETIA unless he had acquainted her with the Secret of his Prince and that, not all the Fears he was in from the Rage of IRENE, could make him venture to do.
She was not only a very great Favourite with the Princess but had also a more than ordinary Intimacy with ISMONDA, and how far Jealousy or Curiosity might transport her to mention the Affair, he knew not He therefore thought it better to run the risqué of whatever her Indignation might attempt against him, than dare the Displeasure of THEODORE in a Business of so much consequence. The confusion which appear'd in all his Air, and incapacity of answering to her Reproaches on this score, confirm'd her that they were but too just and giving a loose to her impatient Rage, he said all that a jealous and distracted Woman could invent  mingling with her Reproaches, the most bitter Menaces, and vowing by every thing that was sacred, that she would reveal the whole Story to her Brother, who Would not fail to call him to a severe account for the Dishonour he had brought upon his Family. MARMILLIO told her, with his accustom'd softness, that he had nothing to fear but her Disquiet and began to persuade her to more Moderation, entreating her to trust to time for an explanation of his Innocence and endeavouring by a thousand new invented Oaths to bring her to the belief, that she alone was the Mistress of his Affections. But all his Artifices were vain it was now too late to dissipate an Opinion which his Disorders had at first establish'd in her, and she rather seem'd more incensed that he pretended to deny the Fact for which he was accus'd, yet gave no reasons for his having acted in a manner which had made him be thought guilty and looking on the present Tenderness of his Behaviour only as an Imposition, would not suffer him to proceed, but flew out of the Room from him, and shut herself into her Closet whence, tho' he sent several Messages to her by her Servant, she would not be prevail'd on to come out till he had left her Apartment.
  To heighten the Chagrin he conceiv'd at this Adventure, when he came home he found a Letter, which his Servant inform'd him had been left for him in the Morning. He presently knew the Character to be that of ARILLA, and was not a little surpriz'd at her writing to him, being that Night to meet her by appointment, at a House he had contriv'd on purpose for their secret Rendezvous, and where, in the full Enjoyment of his yet unsated Wishes, he had hoped to make himself some amends for the Vexations of the Pay opening it, therefore a mixture of Delight and Fear be found it contained these Lines.
 To the Perjured and Inconstant MARMILLIO .
   The Heart that has plurality of Engagements, cannot be said to be affected with any one of them, nor consequently feel any great Concern at breaking off.——— In the Charms of Lutetia, you will easily forget the inferior ones ARILLA is mistress of yet it is so natural, at least to me, to expect a return equal in value to what I give that I cannot be so fondly complaisant, as to make a Present of my Affections, where all the Reward I can hope to receive, is Hypocrisy and Deceit: neither am I enough experienc'd in the Custom of a Court, to approve, or indeed to know how to carry on the Gallantries I see so much in fashion.——If I love at all, it must be with sincerity I have not yet learned to parcel out my Heart, and divide my Tenderness as I would do my Time, one hour with this, the next with a different Admirer, a third with another, and so on pretending equally alike to all:-- No, he that has me, must have my whole 'Soul, and every Faculty must be the dear  Engrosser's. This is indeed to love all other Passions which bear that Name, are no more than so many Prophanations 'of the Deity, and since no other can be hoped for in a Correspondence with the false MARMILLIO, I abjure it for even— Lose not therefore any of those Moments, 'which, doubtless, you may employ with 'more pleasure, in vainly waiting for me at that House which was intended for our meeting. It is not fit that Truth and Tenderness, like mine, should be the 'Recompense of Perjury and Ingratitude, such as yours and tho by Violence you have already triumph'd over my defenseless Body, my Mind you never shall subdue. Ruin'd as I am by your brutal 'Passion, my nobler Part is uncorrupted yet nor will I ever, by a shameful yielding, become Partner in your Guilt, and the Assistant in my own Destruction. If I complain not of the Injury you have done me, to aught but Heaven, impute not to any Tenderness for you, but to my own Modesty and the knowledge that there is no. Revenge I could take, which would be equal to your Crime from your Own changing Temper, I doubt 'not but. to fee worse Effects fall on you, than any I could wish, much more inflict;—in the perfect Assurance, therefore, f. that my Wrongs will not go unreveng'd by a Hand more capable of punishing, I take attempted it by all the artifices Invention could supply him with. That Brother with whom she threaten'd him, having been some time on a foreign Embassy, was now on his return, and was expected in Caramania in a few days what Shame had prevented herself from revealing to the Princess, he doubted whether she would scruple to make known to him, who, in the vindication of the Honour of his House, would certainly make his appeal to the Prince, for obliging him to the performance of his Contract. He was very sensible, that THEODORE could not well incur the displeasure of a Man so dear to the Caramanians, and who had been so great a Favourite with his Father and the thoughts of being, compel'd to marry a Woman for whom he no. longer had .the least Remains either of Inclination or Tenderness, were insupportable. Reflecting therefore, that he was brought under the necessity of these apprehensions only by his Fidelity to his Prince, and taking upon him the reputation of being enamour'd of LxTETIA, he took the liberty of complaining to him of it disclosing the whole Story both of IRENE .and ARILLA. A visible Trouble spread itself all qver the Face of THEODORE while he was, speaking, and when he found it had concluded. You were to blame, answered he same what angrily, to engage yourself so far with a Woman of IRENE'S Quality, and who had such powerful Friends to back the Intercessions she may make against you, I know not how you will be able to avoid making good to her what you have vow'd but as for ARILLA, I look on that Affair of little consequence you have enjoy'd, and must forget her Charms. This Reply stung MARMILLIO to the quick he expected a different Treatment from a Prince, whose Service alone had involv'd him in these Difficulties and for a moment losing all regard to the Character of the Person who had spoke, Were it so easy to throw off the Impression which Beauty makes, said he your Highness would have been in less apprehensions from ISMONDA nor had I been overwhelm'd in the Disquiets I am at present under, by becoming your Proxy to LUTETIA. These words being utter'd with an unusual warmth, made the Prince look on them as an upbraiding and conceiving the utmost disdain at so insolent a presuming in a Person whom he consider'd as his Creature, I am sorry, MARMILLIO, resumed he, that I employ'd you in a business which you imagine disadvantageous there are many of my Court who would have thought themselves highly favour'd, had I given them the mark of my Confidence, and perhaps too would have been as capable of serving in anything I had entrusted to their Care at least, when next I stand in need of a Friend, I shall make trial of some other. In the mean time, pursued he, in a Tone which expressed the utmost dissatisfaction, I would have you remember, that whatever parity there is between our Amours, there is none between a Sovereign and his Subject and learn from thence, that I alone, of all the Caramanians, am born to act without control. MARMILLIO, who from the moment he had spoke these rash words was sensible of his Boldness, and the effect it would have on the haughty and resentful Humour of this Prince, was about to say something which might compensate for his former Behaviour when THEODORE, too much incens'd for further Conversation with him at this time, flew out of the Room, bidding him be dumb, for he had already said enough to let him into the Disposition of the Person he had trusted.
  MARMILLIO now found on how unstable a Foundation the Favourites of Princes build their Hopes, and that he had little to expect from the Friendship of THEODORE, in case IRENE should offer her Complaint, as he made not the least question but she would, at the arrival of her Brother. Amidst all these tumultuous Agitations, the Memory of ARILLA, and the Impossibility there seem'd of ever obtaining a Reconciliation there, rack'd him with the Torments which attend Despair in which Condition let us leave him, till fresh Intelligence shall arrive which I expect in a few days, to gratify the Impatience of both my Reader and myself. 
  The End of the First Part. 
  
  Part II
 
  FOR some Days never mortal Man labour'd under greater Perplexities than did MARMILLIO, burning with vain and unextinguishable Desires for the re-enjoyment of ARILLA trembling with Apprehensions of what might ensue from the Jealousy of the haughty IRENE, and full of the utmost Discontent for the Displeasure of a Prince whom he had serv'd so faithfully, and with so much hazard to himself the painful present, the Fears of the future, and those Racks of Thought which are inseparable from a State of uncertainty, made his Mind a perfect Chaos of confus'd Idea s, incapable of Invention, Ease, or Resolution. He attended the Levee of THEODORE every day, as usual, however but found that what had pass'd between them, had made a strange Alteration in the Behaviour of that Prince towards him He found himself no longer honour'd with his Confidence, he spoke not to him, 'but in general Conversation,' and in the presence of Persons, who would not fail to have endeavour'd to find out the cause so sudden an Estrangement of that Intimacy which had formerly been observ'd between them: And what confirm'd Him more than all, that there was little hope of a Reconciliation, was, that those very People who had most appear'd his Enemies, were most now encouraged by the changed Disposition of his offended Sovereign His Discernment and piercing Penetration were now of no other service to. him, than to torment him more he could not forbear accusing THEODORE of Ingratitude and Mutability, but was obliged to keep his Discontents conceal’d and tho he privately murmur'd, durst not complain, nor openly wear the least appearance of Disgust. 
  But tho for a time he had lost the Favour of his Prince, Fortune, who had not yet deserted him, sent him, when he least expected it, an opportunity of relieving himself from the worst and most dangerous part of his Inquietudes. He was but just risen one Morning, when a Page of ISMONDA'S came to' acquaint him, that his Lady desir'd he would come immediately to her Apartment, without letting any Person into the Secret of her sending for him. The privacy of this Message gave him no small Surprize, yet not enough to hinder hint from returning an Answer full of Complaisance and Obedience. But tho he made all imaginable haste in dressing and preparing himself to wait on her, the same Page came from her a second time, and deliver'd him a Billet, in which he found these Lines.
  MARMILLIO . 
Secrecy which I design'd to entertain you with this Morning, is prevented, by the unexpected coming in of 'a Lady I would have you, therefore, 'wait an Hour or two in your own Lodgings for the return of my Page, who I will send to conduct you when it is a proper time. I have Business of the utmost consequence to impart to you, and flatter myself that you Will not think it 'too great a trouble to be made the Confidant of her, who, on all Occasions, will be ready to retaliate the Obligation.'
ISMONDA.
  There Was something in this Impatiency, Which not all the Cunning of MARMILLIO could enable him to fathom he paus'd a while upon it, but was oblig'd attend the Gratification of his high-rais'd Curiosity, till he should receive it from her Mouth but bethinking himself that she had given herself the pains of putting Pen to Paper, it might be expected he should reply in the same manner he sat down to his Escritoire, and writ her the following Answer.
 To the most Excellent ISMONDA. 
  Madam,
Honour of your Commands is of so high a nature, that 'tis impossible for the Person who receives it to testify his just Sensibility any otherwise, than by an humble Obedience, and most 'strict Integrity. If there are Qualifications which may render me in any degree worthy of your Confidence, depend on finding both in

  Your Devoted Servant,
MARMILLIO . 
  Having dispatch'd the Page with this, he waited not long before that Emissary came back, to let him know the Coast was clear, and that his Lady expected him. It was with a Pleasure infinitely more than the Vexation of his present Circumstances seem'd to allow of, that he obey'd this Summons and indeed one would think he had that moment been inspired with the Spirit of Prophecy, and had foreknown the Good which this Adventure brought him, he engaged in it with so much Readiness and Alacrity.
  As soon as he came into the presence of ISMONDA, You wonder, MARMILLIO, said she, with the most obliging Smile, at the Speed and Privacy with which I entreated this Visit might be accompany'd but the Business I have to communicate, will immediately ease you of it being of too much consequence to my Glory, my Interest, and my Peace of Mind, either to be delay'd, or expos'd to the Knowledge of any one but him, whose Advice I depend on for Relief.
  Blessings, Madam, such as you vouchsafe to shower upon me, answer’d he, cannot be received without a mixture of Surprize and Joy The one must naturally flow from the Discovery that a Being so superlatively exalted in ail that's excellent, as is ISMONDA, above what is ordinarily to be found in Humanity, should stand in need of any Assistance, but what she might find in her own Genius and the other, from the Glory of being chose out from the less happy, tho perhaps more deserving millions of Mankind for so great a Trust. Tis true, indeed, continued he, that when the Mind is overburdened with any secret Discontent, a faithful Confidant affords some ease if therefore it be possible you mould be thus oppress'd, behold the Man who would chuse Death rather than Infidelity, Ingratitude, or Disobedience.
  The good Opinion I have of you, resum'd she, interrupting him, renders these Professions needless I already believe you possess'd of every thing I would wish to find in the Man of whom I would make a Friend nor will I listen to any further Asseverations the time is too precious to be thrown away in idle Talk, and may much better be employ'd in that Advice and Consolation I expect from you. Oh! MARMILLIO, pursued she, with a Sigh as if her Heart were bursting, and which, in spite of her Efforts to refrain them, sored some Tears from her Eyes I fear I am undone. The Heart which to preserve I have forfeited my Honour, and that Duty which by the Laws of Heaven and Earth I owe ADRASTUS, forsook my native Country, forgot my nearest Friends, and abandon'd every thing which ought to have been dear, I doubt is lost, estrang'd for ever from me. Ruin'd at once both in my Love and Pride, the World contains not so forlorn a Wretch, as she who lately was the envy'd, fortunate ISMONDA. 
  Here the long-smother'd Passions of her Soul rose with too much Violence to be repell'd again she fight'd, again she wept, but was deny'd the use of Speech. The Astonishment of MARMILLIO at this strange Discourse, had the same Effect on him, as Rage and Grief had work'd on her and as she was for the present incapable of proceeding in the Relation she was about to make, so was he of replying to what she had said. This dumb Scene lasted for some moments, both of them endeavouring, but in vain, to break it. MARMILLIO was the first who had that power, and he made use of it to entreat her to reveal at once the cause of her Disquiet, protesting to her that nothing in him should be wanting for the discovery of the Truth, and restoring her to her former Tranquility.
  Oh! said she, 'tis too plain that I have lost the Empire I once possess'd over the Heart of THEODORE nor are you, MARMILLIO, without your share of the Disgrace. That artful Sycophant ARBANES, has found the means to triumph over both of us he now engrosses the Friendship of that ungrateful Prince, and his Niece Euridice, his more fond Affections. MARMILLIO is now no more than a discarded Favourite, ISMONDA a forsaken Mistress.
Much do I wonder that the Change has escaped your notice, when every day the perjur'd THEODORE retires himself from publick View, and passes whole Hours together with his new Choice, and her designing Uncle. Last night my Woman LYSETTA, the only one of all my Train whom I ever made the Confidante of my Affection for this ungrateful Man, inform'd me of my Misfortune, having learn'd the Secret from one that waits upon EURIDICE, and is by that triumphant Rival entrusted with the Affair.
She spoke no more, expecting his Reply which, after a little pause, he gave her in these terms That in a late Suit, said he, which I too rashly mov'd, I gain'd the displeasure of my Prince, I am but too sensible but cannot think the Royal THEODORE so much a Foe to his own Happiness, as to forfeit his Title to ISMONDA'S Heart Ismonda, of whom I have heard him speak with Praises, such as can be only due to Heaven and her most sure I am, you are in this deceiv'd I cannot think the united Charms of your whole Sex could make him blind to yours, much less the faint and sickly Beauties of the vain Euridice have the power to move him. —
He would have added something more, had he not been prevented by ISMONDA, who hastily interrupted him with these Words You are too loyal, MARMILLIO, cry’d she, and too zealous for the Vindication of a Prince, who no longer is worthy of the respect you bear him. What I have told you, is but too fad a Truth it is not only to testify his ill Humour to you, that he affects a Kindness for your known Enemy ARBANES Love also has a share in the Change of his Behaviour. –Unwilling to believe LYSETTA'S Story without further Confirmation, I went immediately to the House of curs'd ARBANES where, as I enter'd, I saw the Guards of THEODORE, and found the inconstant Prince. seated so near EURIDICE, that he with ease might whisper in her Ear those Vows of Passion he so well knows to make, and by which ISMONDA was at first betray'd, to think, that to reward such Love, was glorious Ruin He started at the fight of me, and endeavour'd to conceal the Confusion he was in, under the pretence of a sudden Headache, and soon after took his leave. I stay'd not long, overwhelm' d with Rage and Jealousy, resolving at my return to pour forth all the Anguish of my Soul in the most keen Reproaches, but was in that, as in all, disappointed some Ambassadors being arriv'd from Anatolia, demanded private Audience of him, and Business of the State took up all his Hours till midnight at which time I was engap'd about the Princess, and have not yet had opportunity to execute my Purpose. I am plad of it, said MARMILLIO . HOW! what mean you? That you could not Reply’d he, unless grown quite indifference, you no longer wish the continuance of his Affections, have done any thing more effectual for the loss of them, than such a Behaviour would have been.
  Jealousy is a Passion which ought not to be entertain'd by Lovers, but while they are in a state of Expectation before Enjoyment, it denotes an ardent and violent Affection, and to whatever Extremes it may transport the Person in whose Breast 'tis harbour'd, they ought to be forgiven, nay, taken kindly but afterwards, tho' the Motives are the same, yet it becomes tiresome, uneasy, and disobliging, and discovers an ill Opinion of the belov'd Object. Consider, Madam, continu'd he, that if your Suspicions are just, Reproaches will be of no service to retrieve that Heart which Tenderness could not retain but, if otherwise, may with reason give Offence, and if persisted in, become fatal to the very Purpose their aim is to accomplish.  cannot deny, answer'd she, the truth of these Suggestions, I was myself always of the same opinion, and have wonder'd at the Folly of those Women who  have seen taking these extravagant measures for reclaiming the darling Rover, which never ended but in a total Breach, and sometimes gave a Pretence for ill Treatment but, O MARMILLIO ! I was not then a Lover, I knew not what it was to feel the Stings of Tenderness abus'd I then had Reason, but now, alas! have none. Yes, Madam, resumed MARMILLIO, you testify by those very Words, that you have yet enough, would you but exert it Besides, permit me, most excellent ISMONDA! to entreat you would a little examine your own Heart, which few, when instigated by Passion, have the power to do and tell me then if 'Pride has not an equal share with Love, in your Resentment. Can it be otherwise? reply' she, hastily What Woman can endure Neglect even from the Man she hates as much less where rewarded ardent Vows of everlasting Passion have sooth'd her Vanity into an assurance of her Lover's Truth?
To be forsaken Heavens! is there a Curse beyond it! Besides, my Reputation is here concern'd, the Secret of my Intrigue will be discover'd by its breaking off that Respect, that tender Friendship which THEODORE has paid me, once chang'd to cold Civility, or Disregard, will put People on an enquiry into the Cause, which easily enough may be discern'd a sudden Estrangement is an infallible demonstration of a past Amour, and even HYANTHE herself would guess the Truth. Tis certain, said he and to prevent it. I would thus advise. When next you see the Prince, conceal, if possible, all tokens of your Discontent Let him not think you jealous for if that Passion once break out, tho' in the softest Terms, he will be ever on his guard and Caution breeds Disgust, which may in time make him more guilty than you at present think him. By seeming not to suspect, you will keep him ever yours in show, even tho' he ceases to be so in reality by this means your Character remains unsully'd, and your Power as great, to the World's eye, as when you first possess'd his fondest Wishes—Nor are these all the Advantages which from such a Behaviour may accrue suppose some sudden start of Fancy should, for a time, deprive you of his Heart, and lead his wandering Desires to the Enjoyment of another Object, what Method so probable to reclaim him as this  recommend ?— In acting thus, you are certain not to err, you infallibly secure your Interest and Reputation by it, and perhaps, also your Lover. To enable you to pursue it, Madam, continued he, have still before your Eyes the examples of those Women who have had strength of Resolution to take those Steps, and even in old Age, in the midst of Deformity and Wrinkles, preserv'd their Empire in spite of the opposing Charms of their more young and lovely Rivals. Remember the sam'd Mistress of the late Armenian Monarch was he not the wisest and the greatest King, that, since the first ARSACES, ever ruled in Asia? Yet did not this Woman, by her subtilty, maintain a Power over him, superior to what his whole Council, tho' compos'd of the most learned Men the World produced, could boast? Did he transact any material Affair without her? Were there any Promotions or Degradings in which she had not a hand? Did he make War or Peace, masking her Opinion Did she not with him receive the Embassies of foreign Princes, and according to her Judgment, did he not form his Answers? In fine, she was the sovereign Dictatress of all his Words and Actions. And pray, by what measures did she preserve this absolute Dominion, but by those I would set down to all who are the Mistresses of Kings? When young, beautiful, and possess'd of Charms unrasted, there needed no other attractions to captivate an amorous Heart but long before her Bloom decay'd, her Power would have diminish'd, had she not maintain'd it by these Means. A Monarch, such as he was, great, witty, lovely, gay, possess'd of every Qualification that can adorn the Hero or the Courtier, could not fail of exciting the most tender Wishes scarce a Virgin of his Court, but in her Eyes, whenever he approach'd her, disclos'd the Languishments of her dissolving Soul nor was he always insensible or regardless of the Conquests he made. At first, 'twas hard for her, who had been the sole engrosser of his Heart, to endure to share it with another but soon did her Prudence get the better of this Weakness she not only forbore to upbraid the Inconstancy she found him guilty of, but also forwarded, as much as was in her power, without seeming to do so, his Amours with as many as he appear'd desirous of engaging. Of all the numerous Charmers who aim'd at the Secret to please him, she alone had the Skill to do it always, because she alone had enough the Command of her own Passions to observe this Rule.
  Another Instance of this nature continu'd he, perceiving his 'Discourse made some Impression on her the present Age presents us with The King of Illyria has a Mistress, who, by the same Arts, has render'd herself so necessary to his Happiness, that she preserves as absolute an Authority over him, as when in the full pride of glorious Beauty he languish'd for Enjoyment, and reigns more than Queen, triumphant over an injur'd Wife, and slighted Family who, aw'd by her superior Power, dare but in whispers breathe out their Repinings.
  On the contrary, added he, please but to turn your Eyes on the Effects of Jealousy disclos'd You arc too well acquainted with the Affairs of foreign Courts to need Intelligence from me, how the late King of Cappadocia, by publickly avowing his Suspicions of his new wedded Bride, created in her such an aversion to him as never could be remov'd. The Animosities between them were fatal to his Peace and, as 'tis thought, his Life for he expir'd soon after without any visible Disease. You must also know, and, I believe, are enough a Friend to 'Dalmatia, to lament the Misfortunes which the Prince of it sustains through this destructive Passion. Had the fair Partner of his Bed and Throne, to her other excellent Qualifications, added Patience, how flourishing a Monarchy might that have been? Had she despis'd or check'd the Persons, who, perhaps, envious of her Happiness, brought her the News of a criminal Conversation between her Husband, and the Wife of a certain Nobleman of his Court, 'tis probable the Amour would soon have known a period, and she been more endear'd than ever, by this Indulgence to the Prince's Affections but instead of that, she flies out into Extravagancies unbecoming of her Rank, the Duty of a Wife, or the common Interest of them both. They part Houses, have different Parties, they omit nothing which may expose each other the Friends on both sides finding their Endeavours vain to reconcile them, will no longer take part with either. The Subjects following the Example of their Sovereigns, run into Factions the Foes of Monarchy make their own use of these Disorders Confusion reigns at home, and foreign Enemies take this opportunity of compassing Designs, which else they never would have formed. But what occasion for me to draw Inferences from distant Examples, ISMONDA is herself a shining one, that there are Women who can resist this Foible of the Sex. You, who to secure the Heart of THEODORE, could consent, nay, oblige him to marry with another , can, whenever you please to exert your Resolution, look down only with Contempt on the little Amusements with which he may divert himself elsewhere. Be satisfied, that not EURIDICE, were she endued with all the Charms which Nature ever gave to Woman, wanting those you are possess'd of, can ever have the power to fix him in a serious Engagement with her. Often has he liked, but I, who from our Childhood have till now been acquainted with his most secret Thoughts, ne'er knew he loved, till bright ISMONDA, with unequal Merit, taught him what that Passion was nor do I think, and from my Soul I speak it, the Tenderness of his Affection ever can be lessen'd, whatever the Ardours of it, by an unrestrain'd Possession, may.
  Aye, there's the point, cried ISMONDA that is indeed the nature of your ungrateful Sex, 'tis Difficulty that endears Enjoyment, and keeps Desire awake Suspense alone secures the Lover's Heart, for when we own we love, we are sure to lose him.
  AS she was proceeding, one of her Women came in to inform her, that the Anatolian Ambassadors having had audience of the Prince and Princess, desir'd her leave to wait on her, having brought Letters from ADRASTUS, and some of her near Kindred. Tho' she had a great desire to continue the Conversation she was upon, yet there was so absolute a Necessity, that she should receive this Visit, that she was obliged to dismiss him, with an Entreaty that he would return the same Evening, and finish the Argument he had begun which he having promis'd, left her to prepare herself for the Reception of her expected Guests, and retir'd to his own Apartment to meditate on this Adventure, and consult with himself how to make the best use of it. The Trust which ISMONDA reposed in him, assured him of her Favour but if she herself was in her decline, as she began to imagine, he consider' d her Friendship would be of little service he therefore thought the wisest Method thod he could chuse, would be to take the Opportunity her Confidence had given him of making his Court to THEODORE, and by revealing to him all she had discover'd of her Jealousy, and proceeding to advise her, for the future, as he should direct, lay him under the Necessity of a Reconciliation with him. After having thoroughly debated all the Reasons, which presented themselves for or against acting in this manner, he found none so substantial, as those which encouraged him in it. Being therefore come to a Resolution, all the difficulty lay in speaking to the Prince in private he, since the late dispute between them, having carefully avoided him but that he soon found means to get over he wrote a little Billet, which it was easy for him to deliver to him, tho' in the presence of all the World, because it was usual for all Petitions and Addresses to pass through his hands. The Contents of what he wrote, were as follows.
To Prince THEODORE, Sovereign of 
 Caramania. 
  Royal Sir, to have offended you, has deprivcd me of all for which I valued Life, yet durst I not presume to utter my Complaints, till some happy opportunity should arrive, to give me the means of testifying, that whatever Faults 'Rashness or Inadvertency might commit, you have not in the world a Subject more devoted to your Interest. The wish'd for Moment is mine I have that 'to impart to you which is of the utmost consequence, both to your Pleasures and domestick Peace, and humbly beg the favour of a private Audience some time this day. The Affair is of a nature too delicate to brook delay and 'if neglected, may involve you in many 'Difficulties, and take from me the power 'of acquiring that Glory which is the sole Aim of my Ambition, that of proving myself
  My Royal Master's
Most Humble, most Faithful, 
 and most Obedient Subject, 
and Servant ever,
MARMILLIO . 
  It was now about the time in which the Prince receiv'd the Lords who attended his Levee and having finish'd his short Epistle, he went to the Drawing room, where he gave it publickly into his Hand, entreating he would immediately peruse it, for it contain'd some Matters of Importance.
These Words made the Prince look earnestly on the Superscription, and knowing it to be MARMILLIO 'S own writing, he retired from the Company to a Window, where, having examined the Contents, he made a sign for him to approach and as soon as he was near enough to be heard by him, Attend me in the Orange Grove behind the Palace Garden, said he, I will dispatch these, and instantly be with you. He turn'd from him in uttering these Words and the other making a low Bow, left the Room, and hasted to the Place appointed where he remain'd not long, before the Prince appear'd and tho' there was not that open Freedom in his Countenance, with which he had been accustomed to accost this favourite Promoter of his Pleasures, yet there was so great an Abatement of the Severity which lately had sat on it towards him, that he had reason to hope what he had to communicate, would entirely reestablish him in his former good Opinion and Confidence. I hope, MARMILLIO, be, it is not to renew the Subject of our last private Conference, that you desired this meeting for assure yourself, if it be, I shall answer you in no other terms than before, nor indeed is it in my power to do it. I should be more unworthy than you think me, my Royal Lord, answered the other, if I could presume so far as to mingle my little Interests with yours, pretend to call an Affair of mine, though it were of Life and Death, of consequence to your Peace, as I inform'd you this is which I would now impart. But not to detain your Highness in suspense, be pleased to read this Summons, which early this morning I received. In speaking these words, he presented him with the Billet brought him by ISMONDA'S Page, which, when the Prince had look'd over with all imaginable demonstrations of Surprize, he proceeded to inform him all that had pass'd between them in her Apartment, not forgetting the least particular of the Discontent he found her in, or the Arguments he had made use of to dissipate it. He acquainted him also how their Conversation was interrupted by the Ambassadors and that he was engaged to return to her that Evening. And having concluded his Narration, putting one knee to the ground, entreated him he would once more honour him with his Commands in this Affair.
  It was with all possible Artifice, and Self extolment, couch'd under the disguise of Humility, that he related this Story but half the pains he took, would have sufficed It contain'd, indeed, a matter of importance much greater than he himself imagin'd the Prince, tho' he could not be called any other than constant to ISMONDA, because he never ceased to love her, and prefer her to her whole Sex beside, was yet the most changing Man in his Amours that ever was. In spite of the fixed Affection with which he regarded this Mistress of his Soul, he must sometimes devote his Body at other Shrines. He could not live without his Gallantries and Curiosity frequently supplied the room of liking, and led him to the ruin of many a believing Fair. EURIDICE was of that number the same wild and unstable Fires, which had seduced LUTETIA, had an equal effect on her both had alike been tempted , both had alike consented to his Wishes i and both, with over fondness, and a too easy yielding, became immediately the Objects of his Satiety and Contempt. The fears he was in Of ISMONDA making a discovery of his Crime, infinitely exceeded the pleasure he found in committing it and the service MARMILLIO had done to him, in easing him of the Apprehensions he had labour'd under on LUTETIA’S account, made him wish for such another Friend on that of EURIDICE  who, presuming on the tender things he said to her, while soliciting her Love, took a sort of privilege of following him from place to place, and persecuting him with incessant declarations of a Passion which he no longer wish'd to inspire. For this reason he was extremely glad of a Pretence, without any injury to his Dignity, by submitting to a Subject, of being reconciled to MARMILLIO  for tho' he knew he could not rid him of the impertinent Tenderness of Euridice, and the continual Dangers which her Fondness involv'd him in, of the Affair between them being discover'd, by taking on himself the Character of her Lover, as he had done in the same Cafe with LUTETIA, by reason of his enmity with ARBANES yet he doubted not but his subtile-working Wit, and ready Invention, would find out some Expedient also in this Exigence, as it had done in others. When first he read the Letter ISMONDA had writ to him, and by the beginning of his discourse, discover'd her but too just Suspicions of EURIDICE, his still enamour'd Heart heaved with tumultuous Beatings her Grief and her Resentment gave him Pangs, which since the full enjoyment of her Charms had left Despair no room, he had never felt. Nor was he without fear that MARMILLIO, to revenge the Coldness with which he had of late been treated by him, might have said something to have increased that Lady's Jealousy but when these Doubts were cleared, and he was convinced by many Oaths and Imprecations of the service he had done him, in arguing with her on so nice a Theme, he repented there had ever been a Breach between them, and omitted nothing which might testify the sense he had of his Fidelity, and steady Adherence to his Interest. After a thousand demonstrations of an eternal Friendship on the one side, and Loyalty on the other, the new restored Favourite reminded him, that he knew not how soon he might be sent for by ISMONDA, and that it was therefore time they should resolve in what manner to proceed. If, said he, tir'd and grown weary with a long and uninterrupted series of possession, you wish the absence of ISMONDA, I believe it easy for me, in the present struggles of her Soul, to turn the Scale wholly on the fide of Resentment, and talk her into a resolution of quitting Caramania for ever. Oh, no, replied the 'Prince, rather do all that's in your power to stay her  In spite of the little Infidelities I have been guilty of to her, I cannot think of parting with her. The faint Joys which other Beauties yield, but more endear the rapturous Image of her power of charming. Still in my Heart she reigns unrivall'd and supreme and sooner would I renounce my Life, than that more precious Treasure, my only lov'd ISMONDA. 
  He then proceeded to relate to him his Affair with EURIDICE and how uneasy he was to get rid of a Passion he had not intended should arrive at any greater heights than would just influence her to the gratification of a transient Desire, it being only such he felt for her. But long he dwelt not on this Theme a nearer and more poignant Vexation took up the greatest part of his thoughts He told him, that the Lords of Anatolia, sent from that King in Embassy to him, had been employ'd by ADRASTUS to solicit the return of his Wife that they last Night had obtained leave of the Princess for her departure and that there remained nothing now but her own consent for her removal. Therefore, to prevent this Journey, exert, said he, my dear MARMILLIO, your utmost Wit and Eloquence for, since suspected by her in a Case where I am, alas! too guilty, I dare not meet the just upbraidings of her artgry Eyes, till you have sooth'd her Soul into a Calm of full Assurance of my Love and Truth. Depend upon my Zeal, answer'd he, nor doubt, my Lord, but that those Arts which hitherto have been crowned with success, when employ'd for your Service, will not be less effectual than before. But, Royal THEODORE, pursued he, after a little pause, as our late estrangement from that Familiarity with which you used to honour me, has been the sole occasion of her confiding in the truth of what I shall relate in this Affair the news of a sudden Reconciliation may render all I say suspected, and with reason give her some Apprehensions that I have betray'd her to you.—I think it then better for your purpose, that I conceal my happy Restoration to your Favour, and that you persist to treat me for some ensuing Days in the same manner, as first induced her to imagine that any unkindness of my Prince could oblige me to reveal aught to his prejudice.
 THEODORE extremely approved of this Advice, not only for the Reasons MARMILLIO urged, but also that too sudden a Turn might alarm the Jealousy of ARBANES and EURIDICE, and put them on some measures, which would unravel the Mystery it was so much the interest of that Prince to conceal, both from HYANTHE and ISMONDA. Every thing being thus concluded on between them, MARMILLIO took his leave, and return'd to his Lodgings, expecting a second Summons from ISMONDA. 
  It was near Evening before that Lady sent to him, and at his return he found her in a disorder which it is impossible to represent. As soon as he enter'd the Closet, where for the sake of privacy she receiv'd him, Oh, MARMILLIO, said she, the perjured THEODORE may now bear his fictitious Vows to as many as his inconstant Wishes aim to undo, unfearing the Reproaches of ISMONDA.—ADRASTUS will no longer live without me. The Princess has consented I shall return to Anatolia with the Lords employed in Embassy from then censor can the love which still my Soul avows for your ungrateful Prince, furnish me with a Pretence to stay. See here, pursued she, plucking a Letter out of her docket, and giving it him to read, see here, what the injured, yet ever faithful, ever tender ADRASTUS writes. MARMILLIO replied no otherwise than by doing as he was desired and unfolding the Paper, he found in it these Lines
To my Forever lov'd, but most Unkind ISMONDA.
Attain would I, my cruel Dear! accuse you of injustice to the fond Passion with which I ever have regarded you and of your little conformity to those Rules by which all who yield to become 'Wives, ought to think themselves bound 'But, alas! in spite of that Authority which Marriage gives me over you, my Heart is too much your Slave, to permit me to make use of any other Arguments than such as flow from humble Love. Yet have I, O ISMONDA! have I deserved this 'Usage from you Or, could I, till sad Experience convinced me, have believed you would thus long have left me to mourn 'your unkind absence in a widow'd State? Remember, my everlasting Charmer, call back in Idea the past Endearments of our mutual Transports and then reflect, if from the blissful moment which gave thee 'first to my desiring Arms, I have done 'aught should make thee cold, neglectful, or in the least deviate from thy former 'Tenderness. In one of your Letters you seem to tax me with what I have but too much reason to reproach you, want of 'Uneasiness in this Separation. Were it not 'so, say you, I should before this time have 'found a 'Pretence for coming to Caramania How unjust is this Assertion, let your own Heart be judge. Well do you know 'the arbitrary Disposition of our Monarch and that the Employments I have under him will not suffer me to quit his Palace even for a Day, without permission from 'himself. Heaven, and all here are witnesses 'what Intercessions I made to be one of the 'Persons fix'd on for this Embassy, but had 'no other Answer to my repeated Importunities, than this That if my fond Affection for a Wife who had deserted me, was more valuable than his Service, I might in Banishment enjoy that Blessing, for never more must  expect to return to Anatolia. What canst thou now object? What Reasons find which can with hold thee from my longing Arms? The Princess is too good to aim at parting those whom sacred Vows have join and did not the sublimest Passion actuate myself in that behalf, I should believe some other and more powerful Motive than her 'Friendship, induced thee to forsake a Hus band whose very Life is bound up in thee. 'Some busy Whisperers would make me more unhappy than I am by such Suggestions , but be assured, I flight them, nor can entertain one thought in prejudice 'of my ISMONDA'S Honour. It is not, however, in my power, to suppress the Talk 'of others.—Haste then to confute them by thy immediate Presence, and Jook the sharp cry'd Monster, Slander, dead!
Thy own Refutation, as well as my Love, demands thee both of them once were dear, and I have hope thou art not changed in all, and that the return of the Ambassadors will bring thee also to the Embraces of him, who with the name of the band joins that of thy Lover and thy Adorer,
Aprastus.
Now, MARMILLIO said she, as soon as he had done reading what Answer can I make? Or how refuse the tender Pressures of this too indulgent Husband? Were THEODORE all that my fond Soul could wish, adorn'd with every Perfection of the Mind, as well as the Body, I must be compell'd to leave him and he does well, by the Proofs he gives me of his Inconstancy, to wean my Affections from their former Ardency, and make the Separation less terrible to be borne. Ah Madam! Reply’ d he, before you resolve on quitting Caramania, consider well if you are able to sustain the Pangs of an eternal Absence from the Man you love and who, in spite of the disregard with which of late he causelessly has treated me, I must confess, I think deserving of it. Deceive not yourself, I beg you, by an Imagination that he is less dear to you, because he appears, at present, more unworthy than you once believ'd. Were he indeed as ingrateful as you now suspect him, which yet I cannot think, 'twou'd cost you many bitter Agonies e'er you extinguish'd a Passion so well establish'd in your Soul. Should I then stay, interrupted she, till barefaced Contempt, and open Scorn shall drive me hence till publick ill usage shall compel me to be gone, and demonstrate, indeed, that not HYANTHE, but her perfidious Husband, influenc'd my coming hither, and now enforces my departure? No, if I neglect this opportunity all bounteous Heaven affords of restoring myself to Honour and to Same, justly should I desire to be a Wretch, whose only hope is to excite Compassion. There was so much reason in what she said, that had it not been utter'd with a warmth which denoted a greater share of Resentment than Resolution, MARMILLIO would have entertain'd but little expectation of Success but he was too well acquainted with human Nature, not to know that nothing violent is of long continuance, and of all the Passions that invade the Mind, none so short liv'd as Rage , because none is so painful to be borne, and were it to continue, must convert to Madness. He therefore aim'd not to oppose it, and by seeming not to take the part of THEODORE, he more effectually did so, than if he had made the most solemn asseverations of his believ'd Integrity and when, by this Artifice, he found the late flames of Indignation in her pretty well abated, Let not false Fortitude beguile you, Madam, said he, the Ills which threaten you in Caramania are but in Imagination, and are scarce possible ever to happen in reality but in returning to Anatolia, you run to certain Misery, the worst of Woes, that of loath'd Embraces, and the eternal Presence of the Man you hate , for there's no medium in conjugal Affection. In Caramania, you but fear the Loss of THEODORE in Anatolia, you are sure to be depriv'd of him for ever nay, what is more, depriv'd of him by your own fault. Here, should he prove ungrateful or unkind, your injur'd Soul might vent her Anguish in Reproaches , but now to leave him, on a bare Suspicion, would throw the weight of it wholly on yourself, and when past remedy, you'd curse the Rashness by which you are undone.
  By these kind of Arguments, that Resolution, in which she had imagin'd herself so well fix'd, began to waver, and before he' left her half dispos'd as he could wish, he doubted not but the next Visit that the Prince should make, would entirely perfect what he had made so good a progress in and to that end, acquainted him immediately with the sum of all the Conversation he had with her. This Day, which was in every thing to be a fortunate one to him, concluded with the News, that the Mother of IRENE being taken dangerously ill, had sent an express for her to come to her Country Seat, at which she was when seiz'd with that Indisposition and that Lady could not refuse Obedience in so pressing an occasion. By this removal of IRENE'S, he had time for Contrivance the Journey she had to take, was long, and he was not without hope, that before her return, the Prince being now more than ever oblig'd to befriend his Interest, join'd with the Power ISMONDA, of whose Favour he was also certain, had with HYANTHE, would render ineffectual all the Complaints the Brother of that wrong'd Lady should make of his Behaviour.
  But in the midst of these Consolatory Reflections, the Idea of ARILLA still fill'd him With Disquiets the difficulty of reestablishing himself in her Affections, enhanced the Value of them, and he languish'd in unspeakable Desires for that, which had it appear'd attainable, he would perhaps have slighted and avoided so contradictory is the Temper of Mankind, and so much is Ingratitude ingrafted in their very Natures, that it seems inherent to the Sex to shun what comes with ease, and to court Dangers and Inquietudes. The fond, the tender Maid, is sure to meet disdain, while the neglectful or humourous Coquette, receives their most ardent Assiduities. Security is the certain Recipe for their Passion and the only way for the ador'd Object to maintain her Conquest, is to keep her Lover in suspense. MARMILLIO, at least, was of this disposition and had the most charming Woman Nature ever made, been offer'd to him in exchange for ARILLA, while she continu'd cruel, 'tis probable no Attractions could have withdrawn his Heart, or made any abatement in that excess of Passion with which he now regarded her.
  The desire of regaining her Affections, being, at present, the supremest wish of his impatient Soul, he set his whole Wits at work for the accomplishment of it and tho' he had been before refus'd admittance, went again to visit her but meeting with the same treatment, entreated, by her Woman, man, that he might see her, tho' it was but for a moments saying, he had something of more than ordinary importance to speak to her about, before she took her Journey. On which, the Person to whom he apply'd, return'd for answer, that her Lady had chang'd her Mind, and intended still to stay at Court , that Relation to whose House she had design'd to retire, being about coming to Town herself. To find she staid, and yet had Resolution enough to refuse feeing him but in Places where their' mutual attendance render'd it impossible for her to avoid him, and that even there she carefully shunn'd giving him any opportunity of speaking to her, made him know that a Reconciliation with her, would be infinitely more difficult than he could have believ'd it could be, while she continued in the way Of his Importunities at last, bethinking himself that as her Cruelty sprung only from her Jealousy of LUTETIA, it was chiefly in the power of LUTETIA herself to undeceive her he therefore ventur'd to make her the Confidante of his Passion for ARILLA, and the unjust Suspicions that Lady had conceiv'd on her account and begg'd that she would write a Line or two which might convince her that it was on a different score from that of Love he visited her. LUTETIA look'd on herself as under too many Obligations to him, to deny the grant of so reasonable a Request but having obtained this Promise from her, a new Objection rose in his Mind which was, that, considering what had pass'd between him and ARILLA, it might be too great a shock to her Modesty, to find that her supposed Rival had been made acquainted with the Affair. To remedy this Inconvenience, however, he soon bethought him of an Expedient which was, that the Letter should be directed to himself. He communicated his Sentiments to LUTETIA, who agreeing with his Notions between them they dictated these Lines.
  To MARMILLIO 
THHOUGH there is not a Possibility of hearing from the dear Engrosser of my Soul, by any other means than 'through your generous Care yet I cannot forbear smiling, to think of how dangerous a consequence it may prove to me. The whole Court gives you to me as a Lover and as I cannot believe a Man of so much Gallantry can be without his Amours, I am in daily Expectations of rinding the Essects of Jealousy 'from some outrageous and disgusted Heroine. If conscious of a Passion for any darling Fair, for Heaven's fake undeceive her I give you leave to call me ugly, ill-shaped, unbred, and every thing that is disagreeable nor will be offend'ed at whatever Rudeness you treat me with, even to my face, before her, rather 'than expose me to her Censures, or yourself to her Resentment, for the sake of her who is already but too much obliged 'to you.
LUTETIA.
  There was something so natural in the turn of this Billet, that MARMILLIO was half persuaded it would work the Effect he aim'd at, and as soon as it was finished, took his leave of LUTETIA, and retir'd to his own Apartment, to enclose it to ARILLA In the Cover he wrote in this manner.
To my Ever-Adored, but Causelejly 
 Offended ARILLA. 
THE most guilty Criminal that ever incur'd the Censure of the Law, 'is allow'd to plead before his Doom is 'pass'd but ARILLA more severe, thinks it enough to let me know of what I am accus'd, not gives me liberty to make my Defense. Oh! how unjust is this! Were there any ground for your Suspicions, were it possible for me to think, after the Enjoyment of your Charms, another Woman worth my Regard, that which caus'd my Ingratitude and Inconstancy, would influence my Indifference also your Resentment would have faii'd to work the Effect it has done on my too tender Heart my restless Days, and sleepless Nights, the unnumbered Agonies of my tormented Thoughts, would not have reproach'd the Cruelty of ARILLA, nor should  have bethought me of sending this undeniable Evidence of my Innocence. I need riot tell you, that the Author of it is belov'd by my most particular and intimate Friend, the Contents will let you know as much but when you allow a Visit from me, as surely now you will, I shall inform you how, being by the Severity of an avaritious Parent deny'd the publick Gratification of his Wishes in marrying with. LUTETIA, he is compell'd to content himself with a secret Correspondence with her. I am the only Person entrusted with the Affair, nor can they, but thro' my means, or fee each other, or receive a Letter. This, my unkind ARILLA, has occasion'd those frequent Visits and Whisperings which have been observ'd between us, and which has given me the reputation of her Lover. ——It now remains that I, in my turn, upbraid your want of Tenderness, and Faith in those sincere Professions of eternal and unchangeable Affection, which I have made yon but that I will defer till the bless'd Hour of meeting, which, that you may in some measure repair the Injury you have done me, you must appoint with speed. —Then, if it be possible for me to retain in your dear Society the least Remains of aught but Love and Joy, 'will I chide the Injustice you have been 'guilty of, to Your Passionately Tender and ever faithfully Devoted, MARMILLIO .
  The Superscription of this little Packet he caus'd to be written by his Valet de Chambre, having the Experience that nothing on which his own Character appear'd, would be received and having carefully seal'd it up, sent it by a Person who was entirely a Stranger both to her and her Servants, to be left at her Apartment not doubting but when she should, by the strangeness of the hand, be betray'd to open it, the very fight of LUTETIA'S Name to the enclosed, would excite her Curiosity to read it and the Satisfaction of that Curiosity, so thoroughly convince her of the Error she had been in, that she would not fear to confess it in an immediate Answer.
  He had but just dispatch'd his Emissary, when a Gentleman belonging to THEODORE came to let him know the Prince was in his Closet alone, and commanded his attendance His Mind being now much more at ease, concerning his Affair with ARILLA, than it had been for many days, he was the better capacitated to look after those of another not in the least imagining, but that the Business on which he was now lent for, was either to prosecute the Deception he had already so successfully carry'd on with Ismonda and LUTETIA, or forward his Attempts on some new Beauty.
But how agreeably was he surpriz'd, when he found his Conjectures had deceived him and that the Prince, after having receiv'd him with a most obliging Smile, and made him sit down by him, began in this manner! The Services you have done me, MARMILLIO, said he, are too great not to deserve my utmost Acknowledgments Your Prudence has entirely eas'd me of those Apprehensions I was continually involv'd in, lest the extravagant Fondness of LUTETIA should expose me to the Jealousy of both HYANTHE and ISMONDA, and I can never foo gratefully consider of what advantage your Advice to the latter of these Ladies has been to me what you said to her, has .made so deep an Impression in my favour, that she is now only at a loss for some Excuse, to avoid going with the Ambassadors to Anatolia and that I doubt not but your Wit and Invention may supply her with, before the time arrives which is allotted for their Departure. But Thanks is a poor return for Fidelity such as yours, especially from a Sovereign, in whose power you may believe it is, to confer a more substantial Recompence. I am not without a just Sensibility of Favours done me, tho' I do not always make show of it and Fortune now seems to join in my good Wishes, and gives me an opportunity of proving, that it was not through Ingratitude that I deny'd MARMILLIO the Request he made me on IRENE'S score.. Rise, pursued he, perceiving he was about to prostrate himself at his feet I will have no Submissions, 'tis sufficient that I know you faithful to your Trust, obedient to my Commands, and zealous for my Interest and Happiness. To the purpose therefore for which I sent DORASPE, the Brother of that Lady, since his return to Caramania, is grown enamour'd of EURIDICE, and sollicits her Affection on honourable Terms. ARBANES this day acquainted me with the Offers he had made to her and guessing at the reason of my late frequent Visits at his House, told me, that no Consideration of the Interest this Match would be to his Family, should oblige him to give his Consent to it, till I had yielded mine. A Thought immediately struck into my head, H  that that the Doatagc of my unoffending Rival, might be of the highest service to my Friend and after pausing a little on the matter, I told him, that I could by no means be content that EURIDICE should thus dispose herself but upon one Condition, which was this, that DORASPE should, at the same time, give IRENE to his Son the young EURIDICE. 
  I had scarce pronounced the Words, when he reply'd, Alas! my Prince, the rich, the haughty DORASPE would disdain the Proposition, my Son haj neither an Estate nor Birth proportionable to that of IRENE, Tis true, resumed I, gravely, but his own Merit, and my Favour, may make up that Deficiency , nor will it be more strange to those that hear it, that IRENE should marry with the Son of ARBANES, than that DORASPE should, become the Bridegroom EURIDICE, a Maid as far beneath him in the Qualifications you mention, as EURIDICE to IRENE.. Besides, added i, seeing him strangely surpriz’d at my starting so unexpected a 'Proposal, besides the Welfare of your Family, I have other Reasons to desire this may be brought about  your mortal Enemy, and the Man I hate, has long sollicited IRENE, and, if I may speak my thoughts, not without Success MARMILLIO, I mean, said I, has often boasted, that at the return of DORASPE to Caramania, his Marriage with his Sister would be solemniz'd. This had the Effect I wish'd, the old Man presently grew outrageous at the thoughts of mingling his Family with yours and encourag'd by the Displeasure I feign'd to have conceiv'd against you, utter'd all that implacable Malice could invent. I listen'd to him with Patience, well knowing, that in this the more I appear'd your Foe, the more I prov'd my self your Friend till tired with railing, I sent him to discourse the Matter with DORASPE. 
  How much, my Royal Lord, said MARMILLIO, I am indebted to your generous Care, so far beyond the utmost of my Deservings, words would but faintly represent i yet cannot I imagine that in this, even your good Wishes ever avail me more than the knowledge I am honour'd with them DORASPE never will consent to give IRENE to EURIDICE’s Bed, or if he wou'd, she sooner would chuse death. You know not, reply'd the Prince, how far a fond Affection may transport the one, or Resentment the other I am told DORASPE doats with so blind a Passion on EURIDICE, that to obtain her he would scruple nothing then as for IRENE, you know her Fortune, by her dead Father's Will, is absolutely in the disposal of this Brother 'tis not her Interest to disoblige him, which, join'd to your kindness and Neglect, may prompt her in Revenge to you, and Complaisance to DORASPE, to marry with your Enemy. Add to this, EURIDICE is young, gay, agreeable in his Person, and every way qualify'd to please the Fair but shou'd all these Motives fail, should IRENE be less a Woman than I think her, or DORASPE less enamour'd than I am inform'd he is, still my pretended hatred to you gives me an excuse for putting a stop to your Alliance with a Family so illustrious and wealthy as is that of his Tis therefore for our mutual Satisfaction to persist in this counterfeited Variance, till we see how our Interests are link'd, MARMILLIO, continued he, taking him by the Hand, I, by this fortunate Dissimulation, have the means of ridding you of a Mistress you no longer have any Affection for you, of preserving for me the only Woman I ever did, or can adore.
  Some other Discourses, much to the same purpose as these already related, having past between them, MARMILLIO withdrew, neither of them judging it proper they should be long together, lest it should be discover'd to the ruin of that Scheme, both of them promis'd themselves to find sp much to the advantage of their Designs. Every thing necessary for each other to know at present, having been talk'd over, they agreed to wear most distant Looks imaginably in publick, and to meet as seldom as could be avoided, in the carrying on their Stratagems, even in private the Cabinets of Princes being generally full of Eyes, which are also too often attended with Tongues.
  THEODORE, now zealous for the Interest of this Favourite, forgot nothing of the Promise he had made him, and the first time he saw the Brother of IRENE, accosted him in these Terms. DORASPE, said he, your long absence from Caramania may, perhaps, make you ignorant of many things which have past here of late at your departure, MARMILLIO was a Person I very much esteem'd but since that, he has been guilty of Imprudences which have alter'd the Sentiments I had of him. I scarce believe any will have so little Complaisance to the Will of their Sovereign, as to contribute to the Promotion of a Man I am resolv'd to depress  hope, therefore, that there is nothing in the Report, that you intend to add to the too great Possessions he is already Master of, by giving him your Sister IRENE, and a large Dowry in Marriage with her. It would be neither conformable to her Interest, or the Duty of a Subject, reply’ d he, with all humility, to espouse the Man made wretched by your Displeasure but if fond Love, and the weakness of her Sex should influence her in behalf of the fallen MARMILLIO, be assur'd, my Royal Lord, DORASPE never will consent to such a Match and if he has IRENE, he shall take her portionless and unfriended. That is not all, resum'd the Prince, that I expect from one, who, I would fain believe, would serve me in more than an outside show 'twill be enough for his ambitious Aims, that he has married the Sister of DORASPE. Whoever IRENE chuses for a Husband, cannot be without Support and friends and tho' you withhold your Hand or Countenance to his Proceedings, there may be others of your Family less Dutiful and Loyal insist upon it, therefore, that on no Consideration he obtain that Title, and as the only certain means of preventing it, .you immediately dispose of her to some one more worthy of her Charms. He spoke these last Words with so much warmth and vehemence, that the other, who very well knew his Disposition was somewhat Arbitrary, easily saw he was in this resolv'd to be obey'd, and after a little pause, To prove, said he, how sacred to DORASPE are all the Commands of his Sovereign, there is nothing in my power I would omit. In a late Conversation with ARBANES, he propos'd his Son ERNEST us his Birth indeed but meanly answers ours, nor is his Fortune equivalent with what my brotherly Affection has design'd to make IRENE mistress of yet if I could prevail upon her, there are Reasons, which, with the approbation of your Highness, would induce me to consent. This was all the Prince waited for and as soon as he had done speaking, ERNESTUS answer'd, He has a stock of Merit which may well excuse his other Wants nor do I think that you can find a Man more rich in inward Virtues, and intrinfick Worth. They must be little acquainted with a Court who do not know that the Dependants on a Prince's Favour, think nothing too great a Sacrifice to offer for it. Add to this, of itself a sufficient Motive, DORASPE had the certainty of the gratification of his Passion with EURIDICE  so that, without any further hesitation, he told the Prince that his Will should be performed, as soon as IRENE was returned from visiting her sick Mother.
  Thus far every thing went to the satisfaction of ARBANES and ERNESTUS, who promised themselves prodigious Advantages by these Nuptials and to the secret contentment of MARMILLIO  But in the midst of those agreeable Reflections, which the ready Assent of DORASPE had given them, there arose an obstacle which none of them had apprehended. Not all the State and Grandeur, which attended this Alliance, could charm EURIDICE from her first Vows the gay and glorious Prospect had no Attractions for her constant Wishes her Virgin Heart, with her Virgin Favours, were in the Prince's keeping and she thought it more felicitous to continue in an obscure Life, bless'd but by stealth with his Endearments, than to blaze out in all the Pomp of Wealth and Titles, with any other Man and thought it nobler Pleasure to indulge herself in Guilt and secret Infamy with him, than share all Honours with a noble Husband. Instead of receiving the news with satisfaction, when ARBANES told her, that every thing was agreed on between Doraspe and himself, she expressed the most bitter discontent , reproach'd him as much as the Character he bore, and her Obligations to him would permit, of Cruelty, and want of Tenderness, in going about to force her Inclinations protesting, that she would never make a Sacrifice of herself in that manner nor would be influenced by any Considerations to bestow her Person where it was impossible for her to give her Heart.— It was in vain that both he and ERNESTUS urg'd the Advantages of such a Match, and set before her eyes the Charms of Power and Greatness She was not to be moved, either by the Persuasions of the one, or the Menaces which the other, on whom she from her Childhood had been a dependant, made use of. But when he repeated to her sprne part of the Conversation he had with the Prince, and she found that he also had approved of it he, in whose Love she had so much confidence, as to imagine he would never be prevail'd on to relinquish the Title she had given him over her. , she fell into Agonies which were very near depriving her of her Senses she raved, tore her Hair, exclaim'd against the Perjury and Ingratitude of THEODORE, and curs'd her own too unbelieving Nature, in terms which confirmed ARBANES in what he before suspected, that she had been seduced by the Insinuations of the Prince. Less troubled, however, at her fall from Virtue, that the fondness of her Passion made her blind to the Interest of her Family, in the alliance with DORASPE, he took no notice to her of the former, but exerted all the Power he had over her, both by Blood and Bounty, to oblige her to consider the latter, as a reasonable Woman would do but finding that she persisted in obstinacy, and that all he said to her seem'd rather to strengthen the Resolution she had taken of continuing in a single Life, he reported her Behaviour to the Prince adding withal, that it was only from his own mouth that she would believe he had given his consent for her Marriage. Conscious of what had pass'd between them, and the Vows by which he had seduced her, fain would he have saved himself the shock of appearing in this affair but finding It was absolutely necessary, both for the easing himself of the trouble of any future Dissimulation with her, and accomplishing the Promise he had made to MARMILLIO, who but by this double Marriage could be set free from his Contract with IRENE, he at last consented to go to the House of ARBANES. Being brought into the Room where the unhappy Victim of his inconstant Wishes fat, all drown'd in tears, and in a posture which denoted the most deep Despair, ARBANES withdrew, as it were out of respect, but in reality to give him an opportunity of saying those things to her, which it might not be proper he should be witness of. The fad and dejected Air with which she receiv'd him, a little mov'd his Soul and sitting down by her, and taking one of her Hands with a Tenderness which was not wholly feigned, he entreated her to let him know the Cause of that Melancholy in which he found her. Can you ask that said she. Ah, too lovely cruel Prince! let your own Heart inform you Reflect on your late Indifference, your vain Excuses for Absence your Coldness when, unable to live without your sight, I forc'd myself into your presence. On too solid a foundation, alas! were my Suspicions built, which told me you were false, and I undone. Now you confirm even more than my worst fears suggested — without a Blush avow Inconstancy, nor seek Pretences for your Change of Humour, but throw me from you as a thing unworthy your regard.—— For by what softer Term can you call that Consent, which I am told you have given for my Marriage with Doraspe? As these kind of Reproaches were the Salutation he expected from her, so he had prepared himself with Answers for them. Unjust EURIDICE, said he, to censure that as Neglect, which was only caus'd by the most tender Care. —The Princess began, my Dearest, to suspect that some more powerful Call than Business drew me so often hither nor could I have continued my frequent Visits, without prejudice to thy Reputation Our Amour, which I would not have told thee but to clear my self, is already but too much whisper'd among the Courtiers s and daily did I expect 'twould reach HYANTHE'S ears. I therefore denied my longing Wishes, for a time, the Blessing of thy Love, that I hereafter might enjoy it fearless and secure. Yet you would give me to another! interrupted she. Ah! Prince, how ill do your Actions and your Words agree! Have patience, sweet EURIDICE, resumed he, till you have heard me out. I was about to tell you, that I thought Heaven, in the Passion of DORASPE, sent you the means to make yourself and me as happy as our mutual Circumstances could hope A Wife has many Liberties, which in the niceness of a Virgin State are not allow'd and if in new Embraces you find not Joys which may utterly obliterate those you have tasted in my once happy Arms, the Ceremony of Marriage has in it no Spell to hinder the Effects of Inclination.  am a Husband, yet love Euridice why then should not she, when made a Wise, continue to bless her THEODORE? Heavens! cry'd she, how little delicate are the Notions of Mankind! How many Chambers do your Hearts contain for different Impressions and Degrees of Passion!—But 'tis not so in our too faithful Sex one dear Idea takes up all the Soul, we have no room to entertain another, and but with scorn look down on those who would intrude. No, Prince, pursued she, 'tis you alone I love s nor can I think DORASPE worthy my regard. I ask it not for him, replied the Prince, but would wish you to have so much for yourself, as not to forfeit the Benefits which this Alliance offers, for a romantick Whim a Chimæra, which has no Being but in a distemper'd Imagination. Cast your Eyes round the Court nay, examine the generality of the married World, you will find infinitely more who for Convenience wed, than Love. Complaisance is all that nowadays is expected from a Husband and good Conduct, to preserve her Reputations from a Wife.
  He then began to repeat to her those Arguments which ARBANES and ERNESTUS had before made use of, to convince her of the Joys which Wealth and Grandeur bless'd the Possessors of them with but all he could urge on that head being ineffectual, he had again recourse to Dissimulation. And finding that she was proof against all temptations but his Love, he endeavour'd to make it appear, that the only way to secure that, was to marry with Doraspe which, he said, by taking away all suspicion of their former Amour, would secure the continuance of it. And perceiving she still seem'd to doubt the sincerity of his Passion, he omitted nothing which might serve to assure her, that it flamed with the same ardency as ever. And because Words are look'd upon but as poor Demonstrations of a vigorous Affection, he forbore no Actions which might make him seem possess'd of it. The Impatience he had of accomplishing his Design, which he found could be done no other way than by well-deceiving her, supplied the place of amorous Inclination and thus agitated, she found no difference between the warmth of his present Caresses, and those which first triumph'd o'er her violated Chastity But still accompanying the highest Raptures of their mutual Endearments with Expressions such as these My dear EURIDICE! would he cry, Heaven cannot give a Joy beyond thee. And then Could I consent DORASPE should partake these Joys but to secure the possession of them to my self! Thus, in those very Transports which one would think should most disclose, and lay open all the Soul, did he disguise the Purposes of his and what was the effect of deep Design, seem'd artless Tenderness, and unbias'd Love. How easy is it for the darling Object of our Affections to persuade us to almost any thing, especially when we are made to believe the Arguments used to seduce us, are dictated by that Passion by which ourselves arc ruled. Rather than be deprived of the possession of THEODORE, she consented to be possessed by DORASPE, and assured the Prince before his departure, that she would receive that Nobleman, when next he visited her, as a Person she intended to make her Husband.
  This Difficulty so well got over, a new one presented itself DORASPE having writ to his Sister concerning the design he had of marrying her to ERNESTUS, he received an Answer from her, which as soon as he had read, he communicated to the Prince the Contents of it were as follows
  To DORASPE.
TIS impossible for any Heart to be sensible of a more perfect Pleasure than mine felt, at hearing my dearest Brother was returned in safety to Caramania I received your welcome Letter with all the Transports which can attend the most sincere Affection  but whatever satisfaction the beginning of it afforded me, I soon found a considerable Allay. I know not whether my Grief, or my Surprize, was most predominant, when I came to that part of it which acquainted me you had made choice of a Husband for me and that the Man you thought worthy of that Alliance, was ERNESTUS. Had I received the news from any other hand, I should have testified my disbelief by my disdain. Nothing but yourself could have convinced me, that you could so far forget our Birth, as to look on the Son of ARBANES as a fit Match for the Sister of DORASPE. To what motive can I ascribe so strange an alteration in your Humour? For fain would I suppose it any thing rather than Unkindness, or a desire of throwing off that Care you have so often promis'd should end not but with Life and with which I have been hitherto so bless'd, that I ne'er knew a Fathers Loss. It is with the utmost Gratitude, Sir! I acknowledge the past Benefits I have received from your brotherly Affection and Indulgence nor should any thing on my part be wanting to testify the just Sense I have of all your Goodness not even in this, the most difficult, and also most exceptionable Command you could lay on me, would I refuse obedience, were the grant of it in my power But, alas! my Heart has been susceptible of a Passion, which is too universal not to be forgiven in a Person of my Years. In fine, MARMILLIO has woo'd, and won me I am his by solemn Contract we are consirm'd to each other by Obligations too strong to be dispensed with and to go about to part us, would be to act in opposition to all the Laws of Heaven and Earth. But I have much to say to you on this account too much, indeed, and too material to be trusted to Paper. – I shall, therefore, defer it till I am happy enough to see you, which I hope will be in a few days. — My Mother's Indisposition has almost left her. Soon as her recovery is compleated, I will hasten to intreat your pardon for having proceeded thus far without acquainting you. In the mean time, I hope you will suspend your but too just Displeasure, and believe me ever, Your most Affectionate Sister, Obliged Friend, and Obedient Servant, Irene. 
  The Prince now sound that what MARMILLIO had told him concerning the Disposition of this Lady, was no more than truth but as this was an Impediment, which he could not but expect, he was the better prepared to oppose it. He told Doraspe, in giving him back the Letter, that if the Resolutions he had lately taken, were to be moved by the ill-grounded Passion of a Woman who knew not her own Interest, he must not take it unkindly that tho' he made MARMILLIO his Brother, that Consideration would be too weak to protect him from his Resentment. He had offended me, said he, in a manner which I cannot pardon, without an Injustice to myself. And if IRENE marries him, 'tis probable that it must be in Exile only she will have the opportunity to enjoy her Husband. These words, pronounced with the utmost Earnestness, join'd to what had been said before, and the late Behaviour of the Prince to that seemingly disgraced Favourite, made DORASPE not doubt the sincerity of them, and fearing to become a Partner in the Royal Displeasure, forgot nothing which might testify he merited not to incur it he express'd himself in the most bitter Terms, both against MARMILLIO and IRENE also, for having enter'd into an Engagement of that nature, without having first consulted him and concluded with repeated Asseverations, that nothing in his power should be wanting to make her alter her Resolution, which if she still persisted in, he would never see her more, nor contribute in the least to her support. After giving the Prince all the Assurances he was able, he retired to his own Apartment, to prepare a Letter for her, which should acquaint her with the present Position of MARMILLIO 'S Affairs, and his own determination, if she continued refractory to his Designs.
  While MARMILLIO was thus happy in the sincere Endeavours of his Prince to free him from IRENE, he was no lets fortunate in his Designs on ARILLA S and in a few Hours after the receipt of his, she sent him the following reply.
  To MARMILLIO . 
IT Have too much Sincerity in my own Nature to believe the contrary in another, without very great Appearances that there were such on your account, your'self confesses and if you believe I lov'd, as I have given but too convincing Proofs I do, you should have undeceived me sooner and if there be any thing now 'remaining to make me doubt your Truth, c 'tis, that you should thus long sustain In'quietudes, which it was in your power easily to be freed from, and of which 'you must be certain I endur'd at least an 'equal Portion. Can any thing be more terrible, than to suppose Ingrati'tude and Falsehood in the Person one sincerely loves? To wish to hate, yet find all the Efforts one can make ineffectual to attain that Passion? — All this my anxious Soul has labour'd un'der ought I not then to repay it in some measure? Should I not make this Reconciliation more difficult to be accomplish'd? And let you know the Tortures of Suspence, as I have those of ill-requited Love and Tenderness abus'd— Most sure I am, I ought to do so but t though I am of a Humour nicely just to 'others, I am too liable to forget what is owing to myself nor have I enough the power of disguising the Passions of my Soul, not to let you know that I receive this Evidence of your Integrity with a Joy, which no Expressions of it can make you comprehend but if you are at leisure this Evening, to make a Visit at that House which was before designed pur Scene of Happiness my Behaviour shall 'demonstrate with how ardent a Passion
  My Dear MARMILLIO 'S ETERNALLY DEVOTED
ARILLA. 
  Mean and enervate would be all Description of what this now transported Lover felt, at but the Prospect of approaching Bliss much more, when at the appointed time he was in the real Possession of it the experienced Reader's Imagination alone can do justice to Extasies, which he will own beyond the reach of Words. Buried, therefore, in the tumultuous Transport, let us leave him for a while, and return to the enamour'd prince, who was in daily apprehension of being eternally depriv'd of those Felicities his Favourite enjoy'd, in the supremest manner that Youth and mutual Desire could yield.
  AS much as possible had he delay'd his Answer to the Anatolian Ambassadors on the Business they were sent on from their King but no longer being able to find any Excuses to detain them, he was at last oblig'd to deliver his Dispatches. They here now preparing for their departure, and ISMONDA at her wits ends for a Pretence to stay behind them. HYANTHE had already given her consent, nor could the Prince interpose, without giving too plain a Proof how deeply he was interested in it. The melancholy Hours these Lovers now pass'd together, was proportion'd to the height of Happiness they had enjoy'd, while no intruding Fears of separation embitter'd the Ecstasy of rewarded Tenderness. ISMONDA to her other Vexations, had that added of being depriv'd of MARMILLIO, from whose apt Invention and Advice, she might have hoped some Relief from the present exigence she durst not publickly countenance him for fear of disobliging the Prince, with whom she, as well as the rest of the Court, believ'd him in disgrace and THEODORE was now perpetually with her, that she had not an opportunity of entertaining him in private. But it was not so with her impatient Lover , he fail'd not to communicate the Misfortunes which threaten'd the prosecution of his Love ta him, and conjure him to use his utmost Efforts for finding out some Stratagem by which he might preserve this Darling of his Soul. It is not to be doubted but that MARMILLIO exerted his utmost skill to requite the Obligations he had lately receiv'd from the Friendship of the Prince, and to render himself worthy of his restored Confidence yet could not all his Subtilty find any Expedient which had the prospect of Success. Never were any Persons involv'd in a more perplexed Dileptma than were these three but by what means they were extricated from it, and who had the Glory of inventing it, I shall, at another opportunity, faithfully relate.
  The end of the second part.

Part III
  THE Day prefix'd for the departure of the Anatolian Ambassadors being very near at hand, not only THEODORE, but MARMILLIO also, having so great an Interest in preserving himself in the Favour he had lately regain'd, were almost distracted to find, that on cool Consideration, every Stratagem that either of them could invent for the detaining of ISMONDA, appear'd impracticable but tho' neither of them wanted Cunning nor Artifice, yet in the Affairs of Love, that Lady gave an Instance, that no Subtilty can vie with that of Woman's, when resolute to obtain her Purpose.
  ADRASTUS had a Brother, who, by being born some Years before him, depriv'd him of a very great Title, hereditary to the elder Sons of that Family but tho' the Dignity was inseparable from his Birth, there appear'd even from his Childhood an incapacity of managing the Estate which was to descend with it i and when arriv'd at maturity, discover'd such strange Caprices in his Humour, as might very well pass for the effects of Idiotism or Frenzy The Father, therefore, in his last Testament, wisely bequeath'd his Lands to him who seem'd most worthy of them, leaving the other a small Annuity, sufficient indeed to keep Kim from want, but far from a competency of supporting him in a manner proportionable to the Honours of his Rank. CLOTUS, for that was the Name of this unhappy Nobleman, was much less concern'd for this Misfortune than his Friends were for him he had no Notions of Grandeur or Reputation, and having it in his power to indulge his Appetite in those things he delighted in, which were chiefly eating and drinking, not voluptuously, but in larger quantities than is consistent with Moderation he little regarded what the World said of him, or envy'd the august Figure of his younger Brother. Never had he attempted tp disturb him in the peaceable enjoyments of tfhose Revenues which were his by Birthright, had not the frequent Importunities of almost as many as were acquainted with him, in a manner compell'd him to do it and more to get rid of their Admonitions, than to gratify any Desire of his own, he at last consented to have recourse to Law, and put ADRASTUS to the proof of the justice of their Father's Will. Tedious, and prodigious expensive on both sides was this Controversy, the Decision lying wholly on the Question, If Clotus ought, or ought not to be ternVd an Idiot. Many ridiculous Instances of his Folly were made known in Court, but whether sufficient to bring him, strictly speaking, under that denomination, the Judges of the Cause confess'd themselves at a loss, and from time to time deferr'd their Sentence, and demanded yet longer Consideration, and more substantial Prooss. One very great Reason of their acting in this manner, one may, without being guilty of an Injury to any body, impute to the great Interest of ADRASTUS the apprehension of offending the King in the Person of his Favourite, no doubt, had an Influence over those, who from him had receiv'd the Power of inspecting into this Affair. To add to this, ADRASTUS was in possession, CLOTUS but sued to be so, and could not make those present Gratifications for Favours done him, which his Brother cou'd. From the generous and obliging Disposition of the one, there was every thing to be hoped, nothing from the mean and degenerate Nature of the other. 
  ADRASTUS had the favour of his Superiors, and was belov'd by his Equals CLOTUS kept no Company but with those beneath him, delighting himself only in Vulgar Conversation, and such, as having a dependance on him, bore with his Caprices, and humour'd his Folly. The most disinterested part of Mankind confess'd the excellent Qualifications of ADRASTUS merited more than he enjoy'd, and the greatest Sticklers for Hereditary Right, could not forbear avowing that they thought it a great pity that CLOTUS had that Plea. All these Considerations, together with the unusual prolongation of the Process, oblig'd some of the greatest Men in the Kingdom to interpose between them, and endeavour to bring both the Brothers to terms of Accommodation. ADRASTUS was prevail'd on to double the Annuity left by his Father's Will and the other having, besides his natural aversion to Business, experienc'd those Wants as well as Fatigues which attend a necessitous Prosecution, was glad, at any rate, to drop it, and readily accepted the Proposals made to him by the Mediators. Those who had flatter'd themselves with the hope of making Fortunes out of the Estate when in the possession of CLOTUS, finding their Designs defeated by this Agreement, Went another way to work, which was to persuade him to marry they knew that if he had a Son born in Wedlock, all the Pretences which ADRASTUS cou'd make, would not be look'd upon as sufficient to debar the Child from inheriting the Estate of his Ancestors and to that end, Women were introduced to his Acquaintance, adorn'd and recommended to him in such a manner, as they thought most likely to win him to their purpose More than once was he very near falling into the Snare prepar'd for him, and it was as much as all the good Management of ADRASTUS could do, to save him from becoming the Husband of one who liv'd by Prostitution, and was brought to him by some of those Creatures he made choice of for Companions, as a Lady of Quality.
 
  In this posture stood the Affair, when ISMONDA left the Kingdom of Anatolia  and having learned from the Lords sent in Embassy, that there had been little Alteration since her Departure Love, ingenious in Invention, help'd her, out of this, to form a plausible Excuse for delaying her return. The Head of the Magi which are a sort of secular Priests, who, by their. Function, arc deny'd to marry being lately dead, she told the Prince that he must reserve that Honour for a Friend of hers, who she would send for to receive it And, said she, because I know such high Places. are not conferred without some view of Interest, even by the Sovereign himself, I will offer a Bribe, which I hope my dearest THEODORE will not think an inconsiderable one. It is, pursued she, looking on him with Eyes which seem d fir earning 'with 'Desire, the Assurance of continuing those Joys, you say, are in my power to give. The amorous Prince could not hear that she had even a thought of tarrying with him, without expressing himself in terms the most rapturous and endearing but giving truce to them much sooner than else he would have done, to ask how the grant of what me demanded could be of service to their Love she gratify'd his impatient Curiosity, by letting him into the Disposition of CLOTUS, and the continual Fears ADRASTUS was involv'd in on the account of that unhappy Brother, lest he should be prevail'd on to marry to the Disgrace of their noble Family, and the Ruin of his Hopes. She then named CLOTUS as the Person she desir'd should be chief of the Magi in Caramania  know not, said she, if he will accept ir, but my appearing as an Intercessor gives me an Excuse for staying, which will be less suspected than any I can make.— 'Twould be endless to repeat the Retributions made her by the transported Prince, for this Testimony of the zealous Inclinations she had to remain with him he prais'd her Love, her Wit, the Obligations he had to her, in terms which demonstrated the Sense he had of them. Never had he been more charm'd with her than than at this instant, and never had she received more ardent Prooss of the Sincerity of his Passion, than those which he now gave her. Their mutual Extasy indulged, they began to consult in what metliod they should proceed in this Affair, so as the turn might not appear too quick, and render the Design of it liable to Conjecture and it was concluded, that HYANTHE should in this, as she had been in every thing else, be made the Property. ISMONDA, after preparing her by some necessary Professions of Tenderness and Friendship, should entreat her to sollicit her Husband for this Place for CLOTUS which he at last should grant, tho' with a kind of Reluctance, and, as it were, wholly to oblige the Princess. ISMONDA doubted not of succeeding with that easytemper'd Lady, who she knew would take her desires of staying in Caramania, as the Effect of Love to her and as soon as that Excess of Fondness, with which at this time both seem'd animated, would give them leave to separate, she went to the royal Apartment to put in execution the Stratagem she had contriv'd and he retir'd to his Closet, where he sent for MARMILLIO, not only to communicate to him the Kindness of ISMONDA, but also to discourse with him on other Affairs of almost equal moment to his Peace.
  He imparted to him the Conversation he had with DORASPE, and the Contents of the Letter IRENE had sent to him on which it was agreed, that, to give the greater Air of Reality to the pretended Animosity between them, MARMILLIO should withdraw from Court for a small time, whispering among his Acquaintance, before his Departure, that he had received a private Order for that purpose. The time also being near arrived in which LUTETIA expected to be deliver'd of her Burthen, it was judged convenient that she should be removed to a greater distance, and that MARMILLIO should continue visiting her, and carry on the Deceit till after her Delivery, lest the knowledge of her Misfortune, join'd to the Melancholy of her present Condition, should throw her into a Despair which might make her forget every tiling, except the Wrong she had sustain'd, and drive her to some Extravagance which might unravel all but that as soon as she was recover'd, he should, in as gentle terms as the Business would allow of, acquaint her with the Truth, and endeavour to make her sensible, that whatever Faults a Prince was guilty of, he was accountable only to the Gods and if she was no longer capable of contributing to the Pleasure of her Sovereign, it was only her own Ill fortune she must accuse, and that it was the Duty of a Subject to study Obedience and a patient Resignation. You must expect, said THEODORE, when first you urge these Arguments, only such Answers to them as are dictated by the extremest Rage but when Passion has had time to cool, she Will consider, that to appear contented will be of the most advantage to heir Reputation, and that to make a show of being otherwise, will be of no service, either to retrieve the Heart she no longer has Charms to retain, or Power to resent the Disappointment, since given by a hand whence there is no appeal.
  There vas nothing he commanded that this obedient Favourite did not readily promise, and doubted not but he should be able to take such effectual Measures with LUTETIA, as should prevent her from ever being troublesome to him nor did he find the least Reluctance in any thing he was to do, but that of leaving ARILLA, of whom he as yet continu'd passionately fond but the Necessity of his own Affairs with IRENE, requiring the imaginary Disgrace to be carry'd on with the utmost Caution, gave him no room to make an Objection to the Proposal of his Prince who assuring him, that as soon as he had brought about the Marriage of DORASPE and Euridice, ERNESTUS and IRENE, he would in publick testify the Friendship he now bore him in secret they embraced and parted.
  But with what Agonies of Mind the fond ARILLA received the news of her Lover's astonishment, is scarce to be imagined he endeavour'd to comfort her in vain, she gave way to the Violence of her Grief, she fear'd for him and for herself, she trembled, lest the Rage of an offended Sovereign should proceed yet farther she knew not but he might be going to an eternal Exile, or perhaps be permitted to return, but on terms more cruel. She doubted also the Force of her own Charms, and could not flatter herself with an Assurance, that in absence they would maintain their Power. Nothing could be more tender and moving, than were her Adjurations of Fidelity, nor than the Imprecations he made, if ever he prov'd false. — Loving her with so real a Passion as he at that time did, it was as much as he could do to restrain himself from letting her into the whole Mystery of his pretended Banishment and had it not been that the Secret of his Prince was mingled with his own, 'tis probable he had given her that Demonstration, how much his Soul was hers. He told her, however, the Place of his design'd Retreat, assuring her he would write frequently, and entreating she would be as punctual in her Answers.
  Having taken his farewell of ARILLA, he went to Lutetia, who believing every thing he did, was caus'd by the Care the Prince had of her Reputation, made no Objections to her removal which MARMILLIO contriv'd to be to a place, where there was no Company among whom it was suppos'd she could make a Confidante. Then, after having taken a solemn leave of all his Friends, he departed on his voluntary Banishment.
  This seeming Displeasure of the Prince, against a Man who had been so publickly known his greatest Favourite, occasional much Speculation among the Courtiers some imputed the Cause to one thing, some to another, but not one among them had any suspicion of the Truth. ISMONDA was extremely surpriz'd at it, and more than once intreated to be inform'd of what was so puzzling to every body , but THEODORE, as by what has been said of his Behaviour to EURIDICE, may easily be believ'd knew how, in the midst of Raptures, to preserve Discretion, and would not suffer himself to be prcvail'd on to explain the Mystery, evading giving any direct answer to the Interrogatories she made him and only told her, that he found him too presuming on the familiarity with which he had treated him, and forbad him the Court to let him see he stood in no need of that Service on which he had too much valu'd himself. Ismonda, whose Suspicions of EURIDICE were not yet extinct, set it down in her own Mind for a certainty, that he was discarded for no other reason than to make room for ARBANES, because that was the only Motive which she imagin'd the Prince would have conceal'd from her. The Advice, however, that MARMILLIO had given her, together with the intended Marriage of her Rival, enabled her to refrain giving any marks of Jealousy and perceiving all the Discourse of MARMILLIO was unwelcome, she forbore to speak any more of him till a fitter opportunity should offer for an attempt to make his Peace, which she very much wish'd to bring about, believing him wholly in her Interest, and that she might in him have a vigilant Observer of the Prince's Actions.
Thus was Deceit either to attain or conceal their several Designs, on every side made use of. The Princess and DORASPE were the only Persons made Properties of, without returning the Imposition, the former of them truly loving ISMONDA, was glad of an opportunity to detain her, without obliging her to infringe the Duty of her matrimonial and with the utmost Good nature, and Sincerity, assured her she would exert her Interest with the Prince for conferring on CLOTUS the Honour she requested for him. And the other, wholly taken up and devoted to the Charms of EURIDICE, had not leisure to inspect into the secret Reasons which mov'd the Prince to appear so zealous for the marriage of ERNESTUS with IRENEand the Banishment of MARMILLIO, confirming what the Prince had told him, he thought it also as much to the prejudice of IRENE herself, to think of him for a Husband, as the making him so, would be to the accomplishment of his own Designs on EURIDICE. He therefore wrote to her a second time, acquainting her with the present posture of Affairs and mingling some Menaces with. his Persuasions, to oblige her to consent to that which he imagin'd was the only means to establish both his and her own Happiness.
  ISMONDA was all this while busily employ'd in her Solicitations for the Brother of ADRASTUS there was no body who seem'd to have any Interest with the Prince or Princess, that she did not engage to back her Intercessions but the former, as was agreed between them, still evaded any positive determination, and continued neither granting, nor refusing, till the Eve before that Day in which the Ambassadors were to depart from Caramania. They waited on her at her Apartment, to know her Resolution concerning accompanying them to which she reply'd, That being negotiating an Affair of the greatest Importance to her Husband, which not being yet accomplish, she could not, without an irreparable detriment to their mutual Interest, leave it in Suspense but entreated they would deliver a Letter to him, the Contents whereof were in this manner.
  My dear ADRASTUS. 
'TT O W griev'd am I, that I cannot give that Proof of my Love and Duty which you require of me, without  being guilty of a Prejudice to your Interest, which would be more unpardonable than the seeming Unkindness of this Absence. 'My faithful Heart, ever anxious for your
ease, has found the means, I hope, to put an eternal period to those Apprehensions you have long labour'd under, of the Marriage of your degenerate Brother. Among the unnumbered Obligations I have receiv'd from the goodness of our excellent Princess, she has taken the Affair between you and CLOTUS into Consideration, and made it the Business of many days, to sollicite her Royal Consort for providing for him is a manner which will not take away, but rather add to the Honour of his illustrious Birth, and at the same time rid you of those Fears you are continually involved in on his account.——The Head of the Magi is lately dead, and that our Brother may succeed him, she exerts her utmost Interest the Grant is not yet absolutely given, but I am in daily expectation of the Prince's acceding to what she so earnestly desires of him.—Should I leave Caramania till this is quite completed, enough there are who would use their utmost endeavors to make an advantage of my absence for procuring the, Honours which attend this Post, either for themselves or Friends. Judge now, my forever lov'd ADRASTUS, if you have reason to accuse me of want of Tenderness, when all my Thoughts are taken up with studying your Felicity be you as careful on your part, and inspire such Notions into the Breast of CLOTUS, as shall make him willing to receive a Favour so advantageous for himself, and which fixes you in so entire a Security from any future Troubles on his score. I shall say nothing in return to what you 'seem to hint at, of the little Artifices made 'use of by some base Detractors, to blast my Reputation my Conduct will sufficiently vindicate my Innocence to the disinterested World, as the nobler Possess I give my Tenderness, will I hope satisfy you that lam,
With the utmost Sincerity, 
 My dear ADRASTUS, 
 Your truly Affectionate Wife, 
 Faithful Friend, 
 and most Obedient Servant, 
 ISMONDA. 
  P.S. Soon as the Affair of CLOTUS can be accomplish'd, and he is arriv'd in Caramania, and settled in his Post, expect to receive a Wife who, by the Testimonies she gives you of her Concern for you in absence, ought more to endear herself to your Affections and Esteem, 'than by all the little Fondnesses of her Sex when present. Once more, dearest of Mankind, Adieu.
  Scarce ever had ISMONDA known a greater Contentment, than that she felt at seeing these Ambassadors depart without her nor could any thing have afforded more felicitous Reflections to THEODORE while did both enjoy an uninterrupted Scene of Pleasure, but Fortune, to let them see her Power was absolute, raised them up new Troubles, at a time when they thought themselves most secure.
  ARIDANOR was one of the chief of the Caramanian Lords, and on the account of his high Birth, vast Possessions, and personal Accomplishments, was held in the greatest esteem of any of the Noblemen of that Principality. He had been married some Years to a Lady whom his Inclination only had raised to that Honour, she being far inferior to him in Extraction, and the Goods of Fortune they had liv'd together in a perfect Amity, nor was there any thing in. his Behaviour which denoted the least Deviation from that Esteem, which led him first to make choice of her for a Wife But how uncertain is the Heart of Man On how weak a Foundation is the Happiness of that Woman built, which depends upon the Faith of that inconstant and every Sex? The onceadmired Beauties of BARSINA, for that is the Name of his Wife, were forgot in the Reflection of those Ismonda seem'd possess'd of and tho', in reality, less lovely than the other, to the chang'd Humour of ARIDANOR appear'd beyond compare, Long had he in secret languish'd her Character and Behaviour struck him with an Awe, which would not suffer him to reveal his Passion and, difficult as it is to smother Desire, he concealed his so well, that even the Fair Inspirer was ignorant of the Conquest she had gained but with what inexpressible Inquietudes he obtain'd this Mastery over himself, those only who have felt the like, are capable of conceiving tho' hopeless of Success, the busy Flame would not, however, suffer him to rest was a diligent Observer of all the Words and Actions of ISMONDA i he had Spies about her wherever she went, and to watch about her Apartment, and bring him Intelligence of whatever Visits she received. Yet so cautious Was she in her Amour, that for a great while his Assiduity serv'd but more to confirm him in the Opinion the whole Court had of her Virtue and he was about giving over the vain Pursuit of rinding any thing which might encourage him to hope she had the least Propensity to intrigue, when Chance presented him with a Discovery, which not all his Industry could supply him with.
  The Evening before the Departure of the Anatolian Ambassadors, the Princess gave a splendid Entertainment and Ball at her own Apartment ARIDANOR was one of the invited Guests and never had he thought ISMONDA more lovely, than he did that night. Among the dazzling Assembly of Beauties, which seem'd each to strive who should excel her fair Cotemporaries in Magnificence of Apparel, and Blaze of Jewels, she alone attracted his Eyes and, like theSun, with a superior. Brightness, eclipsed the Shine of any other Charms. It being customary in such places, for the young Ladies and Noblemen to retire now 'and then in little Parties into the adjacent Rooms, in order to entertain one another with greater freedom than was becoming in the royal Presence  ARIDANOR, not to seem particularly grave, did as he saw others do, and as himself had been used to behave, but always took the opportunity of going when ISMONDA was absent but having more Inclination to indulge his own Reflections than enter into any Conversation which would deprive him of the pleasure of contemplating the Beauties of ISMONDA, he withdrew into a Room which he lav entirely free from Company and throwing himself into an easy Chair, gave a loose to Thought, and to the labouring Disquiets of his o'er burthen'd Soul. But he had not been there many moments, before he saw ISMONDA pass swiftly by him he follow'd her with his. Eyes, and 'tis probable had done so withi his Steps, had he not seen the Prince, who, on some occasion, was just then coming out of. the Drawingroomand meeting ISMONDA, cry'd to her in a low Voice, yet loud enough for the astonished Listener to hear, My Angel! my everlasting Charmer! how infinitely surpassing all thy Sex beside is thy Perfection! A tender Pressure of her Hand, and languishing Glance accompany'd this Expression, and perhaps had been succeeded by others of the same nature, if the same Instant a Crowd of Gentlemen had not been coming that way. ARIDANOR follow'd ISMONDA, unseen by her, into the Drawingroom, more perplexed and confounded in his Mind, than can be well imagined he seated himself opposite to her, and could not look on her, without the Confusion of his Thoughts showing itself as visibly in his Face, as would have appear'd in hers, had she been sensible of the Discovery he had made but Security supplying the place of Innocence, she look'd not guilty, because not conscious she was thought so.. Never did Passions war with greater Vehemence, than in the Bosom of this amazed Lover He found 'twas true that the adorable Object of his affections was not insensible of an amorous Inclination but then he found also they were already devoted, devoted to a Prince, whose Property it was a kind of Treason to invade.
Tho' there had not been time for her to reply in words to that tender Salutation with which THEODORE had accosted her, yet he easily perceiv'd by her manner of receiving it, as well as by the Air with which he spoke, that he was not a Lover in the state of Hope, but of Possession. He now experienced the Pangs which jealous Rage inflicts Aids and this Discovery being far from making any abatement in his Passion, what he endured, is scarce to be conceiv'd.
  The natural Courage of his Sex, however, got at last the Victory over the meaner Emotions with which he had been agitated and no longer being possess'd by that Awe which had hitherto restrain'd him from declaring himself, he resolved to do it the first opportunity which should offer and tho' almost hopeless of Success, imagin'd he should find some Ease in giving vent to the secret Anguish of his Soul. Being fixed in this Determination, he kept continually about the Court? and instead of visiting at the Prince's Apartment, as he was accustomed to do, he now paid all his Devoirs at that of the Princess. There he every day saw ISMONDA, talk'd to her in general Conversation with other Ladies, but for a great while endeavour'd in vain the means of entertaining her alone. The Disappointment was indeed in great measure owing to himself for ever since he had been sensible of her Amour with the Prince, he had taken less pains to conceal the Inclinations he had for her , no more with distant humble Reverence did he approach her, with fierce Desire his sparkling Eyes now blazed. All his Discourse was on the Force of Love, and in her presence breathed nothing but the wanton God. Not one who heard him but plainly saw the Agitations with which he was possess'd, and some there were, who wished themselves the occasion. ISMONDA presently perceived the change of his Behaviour, and also that it was to her own Charms he owed this Transformation but tho she was .not without some share of that Vanity which is accounted inherent to the Sex, and could not be greatly disobliged at the Conquest she had made, yet she desir'd no other Confirmation of it, than what she received in publick for which reason, she always carefully avoided being left alone with him, not doubting, by the freedom of his Carriage to her before all the Court, but that he would have Temerity enough, the first opportunity which presented itself, to declare in words that Passion which his speaking Looks had already sufficiently made her acquainted with. Whenever she met him in the Drawingroom, she either kept close to the Princess, or seem'd busy in discourse with some other Ladies , and when he came to visit her, was either deny'd, or receiv'd him in company, who she oblig'd to outstay him but nothing is impossible to the bold and daringin spite of all her Caution, she was oblig'd, at last, to hear his Pretensions, and to hear him in a manner more alarming than she could have expected or imagined.——He went one livening to her Apartment and those Attendants who were generally waiting in the outward Rooms, and from whom he had sometimes received Answers, no way obliging to his Desires, happening to be all out of the way, he pass'd directly to that where she generally received those who came to visit her but finding it entirely free from Company, went boldly through it into her Bedchamber, where she was sitting in a careless posture with a Book in her hand, which she seem'd to be perusing with a great deal of attention. She saw him not at his first entrance, and it would have afforded him an infinite Satisfaction, to have stood observing her thus unperceived by her, but the difficulty he had found to get an opportunity such as this, made him consider there was no time to be lost and walking hastily up to her, May I. presume, Madam, said he, to ask the Subject of your Entertainment? She blush'd and started at his unexpected Presence but recovering herself immediately from the Confusion which the sight of him had involv'd her in, You seem in little need, my Lord, reply d she, of an Apology for a Demand such as this, when you make none for entring my private Lodgings without permission, or even letting me know you intended irfe the honour of a Visit. She spoke these Words with an Air of so much resentment, as left him no room to doubt she guess'd the purpose of his coming, and had been sufficient to have deterred a Lover less prepar'd with Resolution from proceeding further. Nor could all the Courage he had muster'd up for this Encounter, enable him to endure the Severity of her Looks, without being a little daunted but reafiuring himself as much as possible, I have too often, reply'd he, been repulsed in my Desires of a private Interview, not to have experienced of how little service my Submissions are I therefore now come arm'd with all the boldness of despairing Love, to tell you, that tho' your Cruelty should render me the most wretched of created Beings, it cannot have the power to lessen my Adoration of you, nor make me cease to demonstrate the Influence your Charms has o'er me, by all the ways which raging Passion can invent. Tis well, my Lord, resumed foe, with the most haughty Air she was able to put on, and you think this sit Discourse for the Husband of BARSINA to the Wife of ADRASTUS? True, Madam, answered he briskly, we both are married, but I believe neither of us are ignorant enough to imagine that Ceremony a sufficient Bar to put a stop to the Effects of Inclination. When Heaven form'd an Angel like ISMONDA, continued he, softening his Voice, and taking one of her Hands in spite of her Efforts to hinder him, it design'd her not a private Blessing, an unrival'd Possession would be a Joy too mighty for mortal Man to bear nor would almighty Wisdom have given you these Charms to blast a thousand Eyes, while one alone revels and basks in envy'd Enjoyment. No, you were created for delight, born to receive and to confer it in the most sublime degree, and cannot, if you would, be cruel, where Love and Merit jointly plead for favour.— To the latter of these Requisites, I have indeed no title but sure the abundance of the former may, in some part, atone for that Deficiency, and the other let your Compassion supply. O ISMONDA! cry'd he throwing himself at once upon her Bosom, I cannot live without you, the burning Passion of my impatient Soul no longer will brook Restraint. —I must have ease or die. That she suffered him to proceed thus far uninterrupted, was owing only to that mixture of Surprize and Rage, which the unlook'dfor Presumption he was guilty of enflam'd her with, and for some moments stopp'd the utterance of her Words she recover'd herself from the former but just timely enough to prevent him from taking any greater Liberties with her, than Modesty would admit , and the Violence of her Indignation giving her a larL a ger get share of Strength than ordinary, she unloosed herself from his Embrace, and starting from the place in which she had been fitting How can you, dare you treat me in this manner said she O that ADRASTUS were here, and witness of the Affront!—She was able to bring out no more, but seem'd half suffocated with the rising Pa lions. The Absence of a Husband is indeed, answered he, no small Encouragement for a Loverbut perhaps his Presence might not at all times be so welcome as now. As he pronounced these Words, his very Eyes spoke Satyr, as well as his Tongue, and made ISMONDA know he had a secret meaning in them, which she wish'd, yet dreaded to discover But concealing her Disorder as much as she could, It is not always so necessary, said she Nor so convenient, rejoin a he immediately But to take part with ADRASTUS, is not the Busiof ARIDANOR as to accuse the Object of his Desires, would ill become a Lover. In speaking this, he turn'd hastily from her, as she thought with a design to leave the Room but vastly different were his Intentions he found there was little to be hoped for the gratification of his Passion by Entreaties and thinking he had already done too much to be forgiven, resolv'd to make himself amends for the long Pains he had endured in the concealment of his Wishes, and also to revenge himself on a Coyness which he knew was not universal and giving a sudden Jump to the Door, made it fast immediately, and return'd to ISMONDA and caught her in his Arms, be fore she had time either to prevent him, or ring the Bell for any of her Attendants to come in. In vain were all her Strugglings, in vain her Menaces, he regarded not her Reproaches nor Remonstrances and though the higher rose his amorous Rage, the more tempestuous her Indignation grew, he delay'd any Endeavours to abate it, till the Fury of his own should be allay'd. She raved, the tore, did all that Woman could but alas! it was not in the power of her own Strength to save her, and she was just on the point of falling a Victim to the Fierceness of his ungovernable Passion, when some Ladies coming to visit her, LYSETTA her favourite Woman not knowing any body was in the Room with her, and imagining she was fallen asleep, knock'd pretty loudly at the Door For Heaven's fake, cry'd ISMONDA, when she heard it, suffer me not to be exposed retire into my Closet for a moment, that it may not be known you have attempted me in this manner. ARIDANOR could not refuse giving her this Proof of his Respect, and went into his concealment, tho' not without some Curses on L  the the Interruption which, however, he was resolv'd to repair, after the departure of those who had given it him. The disorder ISMONDA was in, made her little capable of receiving Companyand tho' she rejoie'd it was no other Person than LYSETTA at the Door, yet was she vex'd, that having not given Orders to be deny'd, she was oblig'd to fee these Ladies in this discomposure of her Temper. Setting herself in as much order as the time would admit, she went into her Drawingroom where her Guests impatiently expected her approach in the hurry of her Thoughts, forgetting to take the Key out of the Closetdoor where ARIDANOR was hid.
  LYSETTA stay'd not long in the Chamber after ISMONDA had left it, and one of the inferior Servants hapning to come in to look for something she had misplac'd, unluckily for her Lady's Reputation, went to search for it in that Closet she no sooner open'd the Door, than ARIDANOR thinking it was ISMONDA, bolted out upon her. The ht of a Man in that place, made heF give a great Shriek, which alarming the Family, some of them ran up to know what had occasions it but before they cou'd get into the Chamber, ARIDANOR had Presence enough of mind to throw the Wench a Purse of Guineas, and bidding her be ferret, withdrew into his Cell, and held the Door fast on the inside. Several Interrogatories being put to the Maid, who could not yet recover herself from the fright, she answer'd, that going to reach something from the Top of the Cabinet, a great Rat had jump'd down, and had occasional her crying out. No body suspecting the Truth of what she said, they all went away and lest her and as soon as ARIDANOR heard they were gone, he came out, and charging her that had discover d him never to mention the least tittle of what she knew, either to any of the House, nor even to her Lady herself, added something more to the Present he had already made her, and going into his Concealment, desir'd she would lock the Door upon him as she had found it, and quit the Chamber before ISMONDA should return to it. She was too well paid not to be obedient to his Commands as far as was in her power but how far that extended, as to the gift of Secrecy, will hereafter appear.
  ISMONDA, who knew nothing of all this having been in the Garden when the outcry was made being impatient to get rid of her Company, complain'd of a violent Headache, and by that means obliged them to take leave much sooner than else 'tis probable they would have done but when left alone, was very much at a loss by what means she should release her Prisoner, without letting him be seen by the Servants, and consequently giving them to understand that he had been all this time conceal'd there. She found there was no possibility of doing it without the help of LYSETTA to her, therefore, she communicated the whole Affair, bidding her send the Men on different Errands abroad, some one way, some another and contrive some Business to employ the Women, that they might not come into the upper Apartments till ARIDANOR Ihould be gone. LYSETTA, than whom no body .could be more fit for the Trust repos'd in her, having done as she was order'd, return'd to her Lady, and let her know the Coast was clear, on which, having bid her wait in the next Room, thinking it not safe, as indeed she 'veil might, to trust herself a second time with a Man, who had already prov'd, whatever his Professions of Adorations were, how little he regarded her Anger, she went into the Chamber and releas'd him who had pals'd his Time pleasantly enough, flattering himself with the Thoughts, how dear he stiould, at his coming out, make his Fair Jaylor pay for his Confinement. But how great was his Disappointment, when he Door being ppen'd, at the same time fhat he saw I s JVI o N p A, he saw her Woman also in an opposite Room who, thoush not near enouch to hear what was said between them, was not enough remov'd to give him any opportunity of acting in the manner he design'd. He was now, in spite of his resolves, oblig'd to have recourse to entreaties, and set forth the Violence of his Passion in such humble and persuasive Terms, that had not. the most potent Prepossession that ever was, enabled her to resist his Importunities, ADRASTUS had been in no small danger of being injur'd the same way by ARIDANOR, as he had been by the Prince of Caramania. But that everpresent Idea kept her firm and immoveable by any other Charms or Sollicita tions, and the little Inclination she had to hear him, join'd with the Apprehensions that he might possibly be known to have been there in private, made her express an Impatience for his leaving her Apartment, which sufficiently assur'd him, all the tender Arguments he cou'd urge, would be but thrown away. He resum'd, as his last hope, that boldness he had lately cast aside, and told her, that he was but too sensible her Cruelty to him sprung from other Reasons than those she was willing to confess, and that to his certain knowledge, there was a happy Man who triumph'd over his unavailing Pressures, and the Honour of ADRASTUS. This Reproach, confirming her in the Fears which some Hints he had before given her, that her Reputation was not altogether so clear as she had imagin'd, spread o'er her Face a visible Confusion but willing to conceal it as much as possible, she answer'd him in Terms full of Resentment, telling him, that if he persisted to talk to her in that manner, she would complain to the Princess of the Affront. To the Prince you mean, Madam, answer'd he, it does indeed concern him to silence such Discourses, nay, blush not, beautiful ISMONDA! continued he, perceiving her grow extremely red, I have indeed attain'd that Secret, but be assur'd it never has efcap'd my Lips but to yourself, nor never shall, unless your continu'd Scorn should drive me mad, and render me incapable of considering what I owe to you, and to my Sovereign. In what a condition ISMONDA was at finding herself detected in a guilt which she believ'd conceal'd from all the World, and to find it known to him, who aim'd at making an advantage of the Discovery, so contrary to her Inclinations, to her Honour, to the Obligation she had to her belov'd THEODORE, let any one be judge, whose Strength of Imagination can enable them to put themselves in her Circumstances. At first, Surprize, and inward Vexation made her dumb , but when she spoke, it was with such Asseverations of her Innocence, as had not his own Eyes and Ears been Evidences against the Truth of what she said, he would have given the lye to any other Proofs but too well convinc'd of the certainty of his Misfortune, he let her know Denials were in vain, and gave her Hints too plain, for her not to understand him, that to assure his Secrecy she must confer on him some part of those Favours, she had bestow'd with so much profuseness on his Royal Rival which, tho' she was far from promising, he had the Satisfaction to observe what he said, had a very great influence over her, and was not now without hope that her Fear might work that Effect in his favour, which her Inclination refus'd to do. Fain would he have taken the advantage which the Confusion of her Thoughts seem'd to afford him to compleat his Wishes but all he could say, was ineffectual to persuade her to dispatchLysEtt A, who still continu'd in the next Room, which being separated from that in which they were only by a Glass Door, gave her a full Prospect of all that pass'dand finding that she requir'd only time for Consideration, and insisted on his leaving her as a Testimony of that Obedience she might expect from a Lover, he thought it best to comply with her Desires, and departed with a kind of an asturd Expectation of being happy the next Visit he made which, before he would be prevail'd on to quit the Room, he engaged her Promise should be the ensuing day.
  Never was a Mind involv'd in greater or more violent Perturbations than that of IsfaoNdA it is impossible for any Woman to have a juster Sense of Reputation than had she, and the Apprehensions of what she might suffer that way from the Rage of a disappointed Lover, was worse than Death to her yet resolute never to yield to what he desired, her hurrying Thoughts form'd sometimes one Scheme, and sometimes another for the Prevention of that so much readed Evil. To acquaint his Wife with his attempt upon her, she consider'd would but incense him more, and provoke him to divulge that, which else, perhaps, his own Honour would oblige him to conceal and to let the Prince know what had pass'd, she fear'd might occasion that passionate Lover to treat him in a manner which would make him understand she had betray'd him.— The more she reflected on the Consequences of revealing the Presumption he had been guilty of, the more dangerous it appear'd and she found it' best, on all accounts, to proceed with him only by fair means, and palliate the bitterness of her refusal by giving it him in the softest and most obliging Terms, When, therefore, according to appointment, he came the next day, shejarm'd herself, as much as possible, with Patience, to bear whatever Reflections Jealousy and disappointed Love might cast on hetj and, perceiving, at his first Entrance, that he took it ill, she receiv'd him in a publick Room free to the access of as many as cam to visit her, she doubted not, but when she had declar'd herself more fully, he would omit no Severities of Reproach wruch his Goodbreeding would allow him to make and hearing him beginning to complain of the litrle Inclination he found in her to oblige him, I will not deceive you my Lord, said she I confess your Merits are such as justly might expect to engage a more deserving Heart, but mine is prepossess'd already, taken up with an Idea which will admit no room for any other  therefore beg, for your own ease and mine, you will desist the hopeless Prosecution, and think BARSINA only worthy your Desires, as you are the sole Object of hers. ARIPANOR, who was by Nature somewhat rash and fiery in all his Passions, could not endure any thing that look'd like an Admonition without returning it. The Merits of BARSINA, Madam, answer'd he, are not unknown to me, nor is Same dumb in those ADRASTUS is possess'd of but since both of us have testify'd an Inclination to experience the Pleasures Variety affords, the Crime is not, I presume, less pardonable in ARIDANOR, than it is in ISMONDA, unless it can be prov'd, that the Charms of Royalty are superior to those of Beauty  Be at once, therefore, lovely Creature! continu'd he, kind and prudent, & cure your Secret by binding to your Service the only Man who has it in his power to betray it, and bless a Lover to whom you are more dear than Words can speak. You give but a very small Proof that I am so, rests d she, no longer able to contain herself, when you would obtain that by Menaces, which you ought rather to attempt by 'Per, suafions but know, that I despise whatever Aspersions Jealousy may suggest, or Malice invent against my Honour and dare believe, my Conduct has been such, as will render ineffectual all can be urg'd to blast it but were I guilty in the manner you seem to think, the imagin'd Partner of my Crime, methinks, should awe you into Silence, were you ajsur'd of what, at most, you but suspect. To practise that Prudence you would prescribe to me, you should consider that the Royal THEODORE is above the Fears either of Rivalfhip, or Accusation. The Vehemence and Spirit with which she utter'd these Words, and that Fire which sparkled in her Eyes all the time she was speaking, sufficiently denoted the inward Indignation of her Soul, and made him repent he had touch'd her in so nice a part but all he could say afterwards, was in vain to pacify her, she look'd not on him but with reluctance and disdain, and having seyeral times forbad him ever to speak to her on the unwelcome Theme of his Passions took her leave of him with a constraint Civility, and went into another Room, leaving him alone to murmur at the ill success of his Designs.
  Tis certain that nothing could exceed the Vexation he was in at this disappointment of his highrais'd Expectations but notwithstanding the Treatment he had received from her, and that firm Resolution with which she expressed herself, 'tis probable he had not yet given over the vain pursuit, had not Fortune sent her a deliverance from his Persecutions by a way she little thought of.
  Rage and Despair rendring him unfit for Company, or Conversation, when he left the Apartment of ISMONDA, he went to indulge his Discontents in the Gardens of the Palace, it being a time of day in which the Walks were generally empty , but finding more Persons there than he expected, the present Melancholy of his Disposition led him into the Wilderness, where having wander'd some time thro' the thickest part of it, he thought he heard Womens Voices at a little distance from him. The Perturbations he was in, not having quite extinguish'd Curiosity, he drew nearer the Place whence the Sound proceeded, and continued moving with a soft and stow Pace, till he came so close to the Grotto where they were sitting, that he could distinctly hear not only the Words of her that spoke, but also the very Sighs with which the other listened to her Discourse. I cannot imagine, said one of them, wherefore you trusted me with the secret of your Passion, unless it were either with an Intent that I should assist you in the gratification of it or strengthen your Resolution with some Arguments to enable you to overcome it the one neither my Honour, nor my Character in the World will permit me to do and the other, I am afraid, will be impossible to accomplish. When Love once settles itself in a Heart so young as yours for a deserving Object, how vain are the Efforts of Reason to expel it! The first Impression is not without the greatest difficulty erased and it seems like tearing part of the Soul with it, when one but goes about to drive it thence. Ah! my dear Cousin, replied the other, how often have I experienced the Pangs you speak of! Nor had I own'd the Folly as well as Guilt of my unhappy Flame, but that it grew too mighty for restraint, and from your tender Friendship hoped to find some pity. Too well, alas! I am convinced that till I cease to live, I cannot cease to love and Heaven knows wou'd sooner chuse to die, than purchase Bliss with loss of Honour. Flatter not yourself, resumed foe that had spoken first, my lov'd ELARIA! with such romantick Notions if Virtue is too weak to keep you from Desire, he will not have the power to defend you from gratifying that Desire, when once the Means are offer'd. You know not yet what 'tis to love, and have the darling Object of your fond Affection kneel at your Feet, breathing soft Vows of everlasting Truth, eternal Ardors  ——then, with sweet Violence, seize your resisting Hand, and press it to his Breast, which in tumultuous heavings confirms the language of his Tongue with wild Impatience, and Longings untameable, at last made bold, rife to your Bosom, with burning Kisses melt your Resolves, and— O hokt! cry'd the dissolving Languij her, interrupting her, I cannot bear the rapturous Description! Too many Charms the dangerous Idea yields, what then would the Reality afford! Oh, should I ever fee the godlike ARIDANOR thus, what would indeed become of me!
  That this must be a Surprize prodigiously agreeable to any Man, to find himself the Author of so sincere and ardent a Passion in the Heart of a young Maid, for whom a thousand noble Youths were dying, the most temperate of the Sex cannot but confess. With what Emotions then did the Breast of ARIDANOR swell at this discovery? AS much in love as he had been with ISMONDA, the improbability there now appear'd of gaining her, the Disdain with which he had been treated by her, and that changing Disposition which is almost inherent to the Nature of Mankind, all join'd together to make way for the new Impression of ELARIA'S Charms and he hesitated not a moment if he should not, the first opportunity, act that part which her experienc'd Confidante had so lively represented. The two Ladies had some further Conversation but he fearing to be discover d to have been listening, and by that means put the young ELARIA more on her guard and also thinking he had heard enough to know how to proceed for the satisfaction of those Desires she had acknowledged, and which he too now felt, he withdrew with the same Caution with which he had advanced, and was got quite out of the Wilderness before they had any design of leaving it.
Never was there a more pleasing Cure for an unavailing and hopeless Passion, than that which ARIDANOR found in his for ISMONDA, in the love of ELARIA She was extremely young and beautiful and by that Conversation which gave him the knowledge of her Wishes, he found her Soul as tender and amorous as he could desire, in the Woman he made choice of for a Mistress s and doubted not but in her Enjoyment, he should find those Joys which are never to be tasted but where mutual Warmth excites the enamour'd Pair. No difficulties appear'd to threaten him with opposition, or even delays in this Pursuit. Inclination had already done his work her Heart was his and Assiduities, distant Homage, Vows, Sighs, Tears, Cries, Imprecations, and all the first Artillery of Love, were needless and he had no more to combat with, than the faint strugglings of Virgin Bashfulness, to become master of her Body as he was of her Soul. Nor was it hard to find an opportunity for the accomplishment of this design She was continually at Court, her Father, the Chevalier ORSAMES, having a great Place under the Prince, had an ambition of preferring her, who was his only Daughter, to the Service of the Princess, in quality of one of those young Ladies who make her Train, whenever she appears in Publick, are under her immediate Care, and receive no other Salary for their Attendance, than the Honour of being permitted to give it but there being only a certain number of them allowed, she was obliged to wait till a Vacancy arrived, either by the Marriage or Death of one of those who were already entertained. This Hope, together with her secret Passion for ARIDANOR, made her seldom from a Place which gave her the opportunity of indulging her Wishes with the light of him who was so dear to her, and at the same time of forwarding her Interest.
  Having dress'd himself with the utmost care and exactness, he went the next day to the Drawing room of the Princess and having paid the usual Compliments to her, threw his Eyes o'er the Circle in search of ELARIA who, till he appear'd, thinking nothing worthy her Attention, had retir'd to a Corner window, which happening to be open, she was looking out, 'tis probable rather to avoid being engaged in Conversation by those within, than that she found any Diversion in the Objects which presented themselves from without. How natural is it said he, stepping to her, and leaning over her, as she was stooping to the Window for us to know our own Perfections! The sweet ELARIA, conscious of her power of pleasing, and secure of the Admiration of as many as have the blessing of her Acquaintance, neglects the Hearts she holds in Chains, and fends her Charms abroad in search of more. —Else, why are those Eyes withdrawn, to whose attractive Graces the Royal Presence is indebted for some part, I am certain, of this Assembly, who come. in shew to pay their Homage there, but in reality devote it only here. The Confusion of ELARIA was so great, to find the Object of her Affections sections so near her, for she saw him not come into the Room and at receiving this unexpected Compliment from him, that for some moments she could answer him no otherwise than by Blushes , but endeavouring to overcome it as much as possible, I am too inconsiderable, my Lord, said she, to have enough of these fine things said to m, to be able to return them in the manner you may expect and must pardon me, if I express some Surprize, that, among so great a number of Beauties, who also are expert in those Turns of Wit and Raillery you Men of Gallantry so much delight in you should chuse to divert yourself with an unexperienced Maid, who has passed the most parts of those Years she owes to Nature in a Rural Life, remote from Courts, and ignorant of the politer World. To testify, Madam, replied he, how little I deserve that you should think my words had any other meaning, than the sincerest Dictates of an enamour'd Soul as also to prove the Opinion I have of your good Judgment, never will I address you by those Methods which ordinarily work their desired Effect on the vainer part of your Sex. I consider ELARIA as much beyond the rest of Womankind in Prudence, as she is in Beauty, and will endeavour to convince her of my Adoration only by such means as shall be consistent with the nicest Decorum, and of no prejudice to Reputation which I confess, indeed, our Ladies seem a little too negligent in preserving. Happily for her to whom in the present Emotions of her Soul it had been impossible to have continued this Discourse, without confirming him in what he was already but too well acquainted with, some Ladies with ERNESTUS came to the place where they were and the Conversation growing general, deliver'd her at that time from giving any demonstrations of a Passion, she desired nothing more of Heaven, than to enable her to conceal.
  Having thus broke the ice, he omitted no opportunities of talking to her, which he could take without rendering the Deference he paid her liable to observation. The Court is never without a great number of Ladies, who, either thro' Malice or Curiosity, make it their business to pry into the Motives which induce People to particular Conversations  and tho' the love of Variety inclin'd him to seek in other Embraces those Joys which the unrestrain'd possession of BARSINA no longer yielded, he yet had Tenderness enough for her to forbear giving her any Demonstrations of his Change  and for that Reason, as well as the Promise he had made ELARIA, of never doing any thing which might prejudice her Character, he entertain'd her not but at such times as it might not appear he had any design in it, But as if the pursuit of this Adventure was. not sufficient to take up his Thoughts, and entirely erase all the Remainders of his old Passion for ISMONDA, another offer'd itself to him, which afforded him no less Surprize, and was not also without its share of Pleasure.
  ZELINDA, a distant Relation of ELARIA, and the same whom she had made the Confidante of her secret Passion, when he overheard them in the Wilderness, was a young Lady of an uncommon Gaiety of Humour she had been lately married to a Nobleman of very great Possessions but the Character of a Wife restrain'd her not from indulging herself in all those Liberties she enjoy'd when in a state which render'd her Actions accountable to none but her own Conscience. She had for a considerable time made such Advances to ARIDANOR, as he could impute to nothing but a secret liking of his Person. The Inclinations he then had for ISMONDA, kept him, however, from taking any great notice of her Behaviour and the Conversation between her and ELARIA afterwards, made him imagine the desire she seem’d to have of engaging him, was only on the score of that fair Friend till one day happening to be in a little Room joining to that in which the Princess kept her State, laughing with some Ladies, who had withdrawn for a little Relaxation of that grave Formality they were oblige! to wear in the Royal Presence, ZELINDA came in and giving him a little Blow on the Shoulder with her Fan, Where shall one expect to find ARIDANOR, said fie, but where there is the greatest Concourse of Beauties? But I am resolv'd to try how far your Complaisance will extend, when at war with your Inclination, ..... You must pass some part of this Evening at Ombre with me and another Lady as far from handsome as myself, without any other Temptation in the World, but the hope of winning our Money.—? What say you, my Lord! continued she, plucking him by the Arm after her free manner, dare you accept the .Challenge? or cannot your Good breeding furnish you with Arms to resist the more potent Excitements of your Desires to be in another place? In some Cafes, Madam! reply'd he gallantly, what passes for QaijDardice, is really discretion and if that other Lady should be like ZELINDA, a Heart susceptible of Passion, and hopeless of succeeding, might well seek Eyasipns to avoid so dangerous an Encounter, But since it is impossible for two Objects, tho' equally charming, ar the same Time to work the same Effect, I am apprehensive of being no further enstav'd than I already arn, and wjth Prie and Pleasure accept the honour of your Summons. At five, said She, I shall expect you, the Rendezvous is to be at my Apartment and because we are resolved to have you to ourselves, I will order my People to deny admittance to all impertinent Interrupters. The greater Privacy, the more Contentment, Madam, answered he you may depend on my Obedience and Impatience for the happy Hour. There pass'd no more between them having made this Appointment, she turn'd upon her heel, and went out of the Room, with the same gay Air with which she had enter'd it. ARIDANOR spent not much time in guessing who the other Lady should be she spoke of he doubted not but it was ELARIA, who, no longer able to contain the longfmother'd Passion of her Soul, had prevail'd on the Good nature of her Cousin, to take this Method of bringing them together, without plainly demonstrating the Design of her own. He intended to have told that Lady of the Invitation he had receiv'd from ZELINDA, and that it was his hope, as well as his desire, that the third Person, who was to compleat the Set, was no other than herself but the Drawing room being extremely full of Company, and BARSINA one of the Number who compos'd it, he forbore entering into ariy Conversation with her that day. 
  The Hour being arriv'd in which he was to go to ZELINDA'S he waited not till the .striking of a second Clock should remind him his Presence was expected but father preventing than exceeding the time prefixed, he went full of Contemplations on what the Issue of this Visit would be but little conjecturing the Truth, or in the least imagining the purpose for which he was invited.
  I told you, said she to him, as soon as the first Salutations were over, that I had an intent to punish you but little did I think the Mortification would have been so severe as now it happens. The Lady who had promis'd to make one at Ombre, has just now sent word she cannot come, and you will be constrain'd either to pass your time with one who has it not in her power to do any thing to make herself agreeable to you, or acknowledge, by some faint Excuse for leaying me, that you had not come, but for the hope of being more pleasingly entertain'd. If any body suffers by this Accident, answered he, it can be only yourself. . . I am too sensible of the Blessing of being admitted to a private Conversation with a Lady of jour Beauty and Accomplishments, to be able to part with it without the utmost Regret am afraid my Inclination will, in spite of me, get the better of Good manners, and you will be compell'd more than once to look upon your Watch, and remind me it grows late, before you get rid of your Guest. I expected no less than this, resumed she, from the well-known Gallantry of ARIDANOR but to whichever of these Motives, your Inclination, or Goodmanners, I am indebted for your stay, I ought to make it as agreeable as I can and since the design of your coming was play, what think you of a Game at Tiquet? To which he having agreed, Cards were immediately brought in by her Woman, who no sooner had set the Table, than she immediately withdrew, hutting the Door after her.
  They continued playing a considerable time, but ZELINDA play'd the Game so ill, that it might easily be perceiv'd her Thoughts were employ'd a different way. ARIDANOR also had his Cogitations, nor well knew how to form a Judgment of her Behaviour  but he remain'd not long in this Dilemma she threw the Cards out of her Hand on a sudden, and affecting to start at' something which just then came into her Head Bless me! Cry’d she, what will my Servants think that I have order'd myself to be deny'd to all the World, while I am lock'd up in private with the most agreeable of his Sex! These Words opening his Eyes, he wonder'd at himself that he had so long been dull and by her Example, laying aside the Cards, Did the divine ZELINDA think me so, said he, we might have employ'd our time much better than in this insipid Diversion. But it is not yet too late, continued he, drawing his Chair near to hers, to repair what we have lost the future Moments may at tone for the omission we have been guilty of in the past. How strangely you talk, resumed she, is it impossible for ARIDANOR to be alone with a Woman, who is young, and accounted tolerably agreeable, without having such odd Fancies in his Head? Whatever may be possible to me, reply'd he, I am sure it is not for the enchanting ZELINDA to be seen by any Man, without creating in him a Desire of being alone with her. Well, said she, it must be confess'd, that you have the best turn of Raillery of any Man about Court.
  But prithee let's be serious, or else to Cards again. As much in earnest as you please, Madam! rejoin'd he, taking her in his Arms, and beginning to treat her with some Familiarities, which gave her indeed no room to doubt she had been disappointed in her Expectations. Heavens! Cry’d she, with an Air of Astonishment, and making some sew saint Efforts to disengage herself, what is it you mean to do ?——But I see what encourages you know well enough my Husband is out of town—that all my Servants are out of hearing— that my Bed Chamber is in the very next Room that I am but a weak Woman, and that you are the most engaging Creature that ever was born but if ever I give you such an Opportunity again It shall be my fault if I make not the best use of this, said he, redoubling the Freedoms he had already began with her and by this time fired with that Passion, which is often mistaken for Love, and is ordinarily more successful, he bore her to the Chamber, to which, by forbidding, she invited him, and for some Moments lost all remembrance of both ISMONDA and ELARIA.
  Tho' this Amour was too sudden to afford much Delicacy, yet as ZELINDA was a very lovely Woman, and of a humour prodigiously entertaining, it was not only to oblige her, that ARIDANOR resolved to continue a Correspondence with her of the same kind he had begun, nor were his Transports feigned, or the Protestations he made her of an eternal Gratitude wholly composed of Deceit. In the midst of their Endearments, she also threw off her Affectation, confess'd she had long languished for him with an unspeakable Desire  that she had appointed him to come with no other view, than to try how far he liked her naturally concluding, that if he thought her worthy his Addresses, he would not neglect so favourable an opportunity of making them. They parted not till it was very late, nor without mutual Assurances of frequently renewing thole Delights, with which neither of them as yet were satiated.
  This Darling of the Fair, the happy ARIDANQR, past the remainder of the Night in Contemplations perfectly pleasing to be beloved by two such Women as ELARIA and ZELINDA, was sufficient to gratify the Vanity of any Man, and tho the Method the latter of them had taken to engage him, had something in it very extraordinary, yet imputing it to the Violence of her Passion, it did not in the least abate his Esteem of her.
  Yet could not this Intrigue justly bear any Other Name than that of an Amusement it engross'd not the Soul, it chas'd no other Ideas thence, it was enough, that when they were together, that each was the sole Object of the other's Affections apartthey had different Sentiments, and the free Mind disdaining all restraint, refus'd admittance to no pleasing Image. One thing, however, ARIDANOR took care of, which was never to engage ELARIA in a particular Conversation when ZELINDA was present fearing with reason, that the Jealousy of that Lady once alarm'd, might make her take some Steps which might put a stop to the Gratification of his Desires on this young Beauty. Nor was he without apprehensions, that all his caution in this Affair might be in vain he knew how far the innocent Languisher had already betray'd herself to her, and it was highly probable that the next time they were alone together, she would also make her acquainted with the Declarations he had made to her for which reason he kept them, as much as possible, asunder, by engaging either the one or the other in Appointments with himself. As yet no opportunity had offer'd, in which he could take those advantages the Passion of ELARIA had given him over her and this Affair, which from the knowledge of her Sentiments threatned so little difficulty in accomplishing, he found infinitely more hard than he could have imagin'd. He was often alone with her indeed, but then it was only in such places as gave him no assurance he should not meet with an Interruption. She had no Apartment, as yet, afsign'd her in the Palace, and to visit her at her Father's House, would have been far from advancing his Designsto entreat her to accompany him to any place of privacy, he thought would too plainly let her into his Reasons for such a Request, and give a Shock to her Modesty, which would enable her to refuses tho' her Wishes should with the utmost ardency prompt her to grant. Long was he debating within himself what course to take, and had till now, perhaps, been undetermin'd, had Chance not interpos'd and put a period to the Contest.
  As he was one day in the Apartment of HYANTHE, he heard that Princess call for EURIDICE, who was then walking in the Gardens of the Palace with ELARIA he happen'd to fee them as he was looking out of the Window, and immediately made an Errand down to tell her, that her attendance was required on which, she hastily taking leave of ELARIA, that intended Victim of his amorous Flames was left alone with him. It presently came into his Head, to make that place in which he first receiv'd the knowledge of her Love, the Scene of his accomplishing it, and entertaining her with discourses too pleasing to her Wishes for her to break them off, she was insensibly led to the Gate which open'd into the Wilderness which he pushing back with his Hand in order to go in, her good Angel, that moment, warning her of the Danger to which she was about to be expos'd, Let us turn back, my Lord, said she, the wild Solitude of this place has nothing agreeable in it.—— Yet it was here, Madam! answer'd he, that I receiv'd that Inspiration which makes all my Merit 'twas here the God of Love first show'd me what his Power could do Permit me to conduct you, and I will show you that very spot of Earth whence came the blissful Arrow which fix'd me ever yours. It was not in the power of ELARIA to comprehend the Myltery of these Words, and while she was pausing on the meaning of them, he took her by the Hand and drew hef into that Retirement, which seem’d, indeed, design'd by Nature for an Amorous Rendezvous.——On the still rising Camomile no Tracks appear'd to guide observance on the wanderer's Steps, and the close meeting Trees deny'd access even to the Eye of PHOEBUS a thousand little Grots on every side, arch'd o'er with mingling Boughs, invited to repose within their sweet recess. Can any thing, said ARIDANOR, be more indulging to the Mind than this delightful Shade? How could I here lie down, forgetful of the World, its Cares, its noisy Pleasures, and quite dissolv'd and ravish'd in the Contemplation of ELARIA'S Charms, enjoy, in Theory, such Raptures as only she herself could add to. Let any Woman who has experiene'd the force of Love, consider and pity the Confusion of this unhappy Maid, divided between Fear and soft Desire, struggling with all her might to smother both, yet both apparent to the watchful Lover. He took no advantage however of what he saw, nor press'd her in any manner which could alarm her Modesty, till they came to that Thicket where he had overheard her Conversation with ZELINDA but then catching her at once in his Arms, and ravishing ten thousand Kisses from her trembling Lips in the few Steps he had to carry her, he bore her to the inmost and most dark part of the Grot, before, in the surprize this sudden alteration of hrs Behaviour involv'd her in, she had the power of making use of any Arguments or Persuasions to oblige him to desist. 'Twas here, said he, that Passion first took birth from Hope, and here shall Hope expire in sure Possession, and Passion receive its due Reward. These Words were accompany'd by Actions suited to the meaning of them. At first she had not the power of entreating, and soon it was too late the resolute ARIDANOR let her know what 'twas he aim'd at, and accomplish’d it almost at the same time. So immediate was her Ruin, that before she could think by what means she might avert it, there was no more to fear it was not now in Prayers, in Menaces, in Artifices, nor even Heaven itself to save her the fatal Deed was done, the cruel Transport over, irrevocable Time not Destiny can recall, or make what has been, to have never been In floods of Tears her struggling Griess sought ease, and virtuous Resentment fain would have found vent in keen Reproaches, but more mighty Love here interpos'd, new forrn'd her Words, and what was design'd for Fury, express'd only Tenderness and fill that her utmost Efforts could bring forth of upbraidings, was only, Oh ARIDANOR! too lovely cruel ARIDANOR, why have you undone me? And then immediately after, testifying that the fears of his future Unkindness were more terrible than the present ruin of her Honour You will not love me always, would she cry. It is not to be suppos'd that such a Man as ARIDANOR was wanting in his endeavours to make her satisfy'd with what had pass'd between them, nor that loving to that infinite degree she did, those endeavours were altogether unsuccessful. A Person truly inspir'd with a great Passion, never wonders at, nor can condemn the Excess of it in another and tho' those Desires with which the Soul of ARIDANOR Waspossess'd for the Enjoyment of EL AR  A, were not of that kind which may justly bear the denomination of a perfect Tenderness, yet as he had always disguis'd them in so artful a manner, as could make her believe them to be no otherwise, it was the same thing to her, and work'd the same effect as if in reality. At length, won over by his Arguments to think Obedience to the Laws of Nature no Crime but in Imasiination, she yielded to renew'd Endearments, and met the guilty Joy with equal Warmth and Transports inconceivable. Being ask'd by her, if her Cousin had betray'd the Secret of her Passion to him, and by that breach of Trust encourag'd him to make an attempt of the kind he had done he assur'd her that she had not, and very frankly confess'd in what manner the knowledge of her Sentiments had reach'd his Ears. But tho, in justice to ZELINDA, he clear'd her of this imagin'd Infidelity, he gave ELARIA some hints, that it would not be prudent to make her any further a Confidante in the Affair.
 With how much ease do Men, when once they go about it, banish an Idea they have been the most violently charm'd with! It is most certain, that ARIDANOR had felt for ISMONDA more than ever was in the power of either ZELINDA or ELARIA to inspire yet that being a hopeless Passion, in giving way to these Amusements, he found that ease which a Woman, in the like Circumstances, can seldom, if ever, arrive at, till Death at once puts a period to her Love and her Desires. He divided all those hours which he could borrow from the Business of the State, or his own domestick Affairs, between these two Ladies, and for some time rnanag'd the Intrigue with both so well, that neither of them had the least Suspicion that she had a Rival in the other.
  But while he was thus endeavouring to forget ISMONDA, he obtain'd the Character of being as happy with her, as his utmost Hopes had once flatter'd him he should be That ServantMaid who had discover'd him in the Closet, found the Secret too mighty for her Capacity to contain she cou'd not forbear whispering it to some of her Companions, who happening to be of the same Disposition, reveal'd it to as many more those imparted it to others, and so on, till it became the common talk of all the inferior Courtiers, and from them rose gradually to the Ears of the Great ones. The Favour she was in with the Princess, her Beauty, and the Grandeur in which she liv'd, exposing her to the Envy of the less Fortunate, she wanted not a great number of those who were glad of this occasion to blast her Same. BARSINA, scap'd not the News, and having of late perceiv'd a more than ordinary coldness in her Husband, too readily, for her Peace of Mind, gave credit to it. The Princess was the only Person who disbeliev'd it she knew that ISMONDA had ever behaved herself with an exemplary Discretion and Modesty in the Anatolian Court, and could not think she had deserv'd any other Character in Caramania however, she intended to speak to her of it the first time she had an opportunity.
  But what became of the enamour'd THE? ODORE at this Report! Never before had he experiene'd the Pangs of jealous Rage, aryJ unable to endure the first Emotions of it, he was going to her Apartment to reproach her in such terms as he thought her Inconstancy merited from him but as he was crostlng a Gallery, which parted his fide from that of thp Princess's Women, he met DORASPE, who throwing himself at his feet, conjured him to vouchsafe a private hearing of something which he had to communicate. The Melancholy which appear'd in his Looks, and the Earnestness with which he spoke, making it evident that something very extraordinary had happen'd, obliged the Prince to turn backand as soon as they were together in his private Closet, Oh, my royal hold, said that perplexed Nobleman, never was a Mind tortured with an Anguish superior to mine. Cross'd in my Love, and wounded in my Honour IRENE, forgetful to what she owes her Birth, has, in a mean Disguise, forsook our Mother's House, and is retir'd where search has yet been vain. A Letter which she left behind her Toylet, would persuade u the occasion of her flight was only lest I should compel her to a Marriage with ERNESTUS, but rhe whole Country ascribes a different and more shameful Cause. Some late Disorders have been observed in her, which the Skilful will have to be the Effects of Pregnancy and much I fear she has .top much depended on her Contract with MARMILLIO . — Contented should should I be, if only she, who caused this Disgrace, were to endure the Infamy but a Misfortune of this kind, reflects on all the Family of the Wretch io abandon d, but most on me, as nearest in Blood, and once too in Affection. Nor am I, added he, in loss of Honour only curs'd, ARBANES but this moment told me, that without I could prevail on IRENE to become the Bride of ERNESTUS, I must quit all hope of EURIDICE.—— There is something so very probable, replied the 'Prince, in the justice of the former part of your Fears, that I have nothing to offer for your Consolation i but that whatever Faults she may have been guilty of, she cannot so far demean herself, as not to add to the Honour of ERNESTUS, by becoming his Wife you need not doubt, but that should even the knowledge of it reach his ears, he will still continue his Assiduities. And one thing, methinks, seems to forward your hopes, which is, that humbled by this Misfortune, she will no longer be refractory to your Desires. I would advise you, therefore, to be as secret as possible in the Affair and while you press for the confirmation of your Happiness with EURIDICE, still keep their Expectations warm with the hope of IRENE Feign some plausible Excuse for her remaining sol ong in the Country and let them think she but delays, not denies what you require. DORASPE, whose Mind was full of inward Vexation, would fain have engaged him in a longer Conversation, but the Prince was not at this time in a fit state of humour to enter into long Discourses and pretending business, dismissed him from his presence, with telling him, he would talk further with him at some other opportunity.
 

  But his impatience of speaking to Ismonda, being disappointed by her being not at her Apartment, when he went, Recollection represented to him, that it was best not to accuse her, till he could do it in milder terms than as yet his Rage would give him leave to do. He consider'd that there was a postl bility the might be wronged and if so, he knew very well the greatness of her Spirit would not easily forgive an unjust Suspicion, especially when declared with Illmanners. He therefore resolved not to see her in private, till he had enough become master of himself to talk to her with moderation  and that what he said might appear rather as the effects of those tender Doubts which are almost inseparable from Love, than as the dictates of a jealous Resentment, and a Passion which sook'd on itself as ill treated and deceiv'd.
  The End of the Third Tart. 

  PART IV.

   HIL E the Prince of CARAMANIA was labouring under the worst Torments of the Mind, his unjustly suspected Mistress was rejoicing to find herself eas'd of the Persecutions of his Rival. She had observ'd the Freedoms which of late had pass'd between him and ZELINDA and being perfectly acquainted with that Lady's Disposition to Intrigue, did not doubt but that ARIDANOR had found the secret to please her. She was, however, prodigiously surprized to hear the Prince had been to visit her it not being his Custom to come to her Apartment without sending before, to inform her of it. LYSETTA had told her, that she perceived an unusual Gloom upon his Brow, and that he express'd the utmost discontent at not meeting her at home. She also saw him the same Evening at the Princess's Apartment and as Lovers easily understand the Humour of each other, by their Eyes, she thought she discover' d something in his, that flhe was unacquainted with , and a certain Coldness and forced Civility in all his Behaviour, the meaning of which she could not comprehend  and being far from guessing the truth, imputed the change of his Countenance to the change of his Affections. Perceiving him the same the next day when she saw him again, she made no doubt but that the Charms of some new Beauty had triumph'd over the Gratitude he ow'd her, and began in secret to curse the mutability of the Heart of Man. Heartily did she wish for MRMILLIO, whose counsel, and perfect knowledge of the Humour of his Prince, she imagin'd might have led her through this Labyrinth, which at present seem'd so perplexing to her and having no body to whom she could impart her Sentiments on this occasion, suffer'd little less than the jealous and impatient THEODORE. 
  In the mean time, the occasion of their mutual Disquiets was not perfectly at ease whilst Love was show'ring on him his choicest Blessings in favour of the Fair, the wanton God prepared for him Perplexities at home, which almost countervails the Pleasures he enjoy'd abroad, He had a Brother whose Disposition was no less amorous than llis own he was also every way as well qualified for Success  seldom had he sigh'd in vain and wheresoever he carried his Addresses, the only certain way of depriving them of their wonted Force, was not to hear them. BARSINA, who had experienced the Advantages a lovely Woman has by being seen at Court where Beauty appears more splendid and illustrious than it can do in any other Place, sent for a young Sister, who had more than a moderate mare of Charms, hoping that they might have the sameeffect on some Great Man, as those she was mistress of, had work'd on ARIDANOR. ALMIRA, for that was her Name, was indeed so perfectly compleat, that she no sooner appear'd, adorn'd and set forth with all the Advantages of Dress and Grandeur, than she attracted the Eyes of the whole Assembly A thousand aching Hearts avow'd her Triumph, a thousand Stratagems were immediately forming and some too suggested by Honour, for the ingaging this new, and dazling Beauty. But none was there on whom her Charms had greater influence, than on the Heart of IDOMEUS, the Brother of ARIDANOR He no sooner saw her, than he became enamour'd with her and no sooner felt the Emotions of that Passion, than he set his whole Wits at work for the gratification of it. He had a thousand Opportunities, which the rest of her Admirers yanted  she was lodg'd in his Brother's Palace, was the Sister of Barsina and by that kind of relative Obligation, might take many Liberties with her, which from another would create suspicion, and be look'd on as too presuming. Without seeming therefore to make Love, he made it in the most effectual manner and all that he did, pasting for no more than the Complaisance which was owing from him to the Sister of his Elder Brother's Wife, he was omitted in the Cautions given her how to behave to the others who declared themselves her Lovers and he found the means to steal himself into her Affections, as though without design. She was young, unexperienced in the Artifices of Love, and unknowing of the Snare laid for her, fell into it with as much ease as the watchful Buiiner could wish. Being, in a manner, one of the Family, he never wanted free access to her Chamber was frequently alone with her would sometimes pass many hours with her in reading playing on the Mustek, in which he was an admirable Proficient or in telling her the Courtnews. The mutual liking which both testified of the other's Company, was ascribed by BAR§INA only to a conformity in their Humours andARiDAnOR, who better knew his Brother's Constitution, was at this time too much engaged in his own Amours, tq observe that which was carrying on between them. Repeated Opportunities, and a cer tain Languishment in the Eyes of the fair ALMIRA, which she had not the artifice to conceal, at length embolden'd the impatient Lover to endeavour the accomplishment of his desires. And one day, when BARSINA was abroad, he took the advantage of being alone with her, and at once attempted and attain'd all that he wish'd, or hoped to enjoy. So swift the pleasing Ruin came, she had not time to know, much less to avert the Danger and when compleated, could not be recall'd.
  The difficulty of a Lover is to obtainhis Point once gain'd, 'tis easy to maintain his Power and rarely, if ever, docs that Woman, who has yielded through Inclination, repent so far of what she has done, as not to suffer the dear Youth to repeat those Joys by which she was at first abandon' d to the soft Perdition. iDOMEUSand ALMIRA, unfearing Satiety, and thinking themselves secure from all Discovery and Blame, indulg'd their mutual Flames to all the wild excess of guilty Rapture. IDOMEUS, notwithstanding the natural Inconstancy of his Disposition, confess'd Delights in this young Beauty's Arms, which for a time engaged him wholly hers and to the ravish'd Soul of fond ALMIRA, he seernd more than mortal. Each seem'd to vye With the other which should exceed in Passion, and most dissolve in criminal Desir’d But this Was but sot a time Soon the sweetness of their too extravagant Bliss, was to be imbitter'd. ALMIRA found herself with child , and by communicating the knowledge of this Misfortune to her Lover, perceived she had not only the Melancholy, and, if divulg'd, Shame of her Condition to sustain, but also, that the Author of it seem'd rather more uneasy for himself than her. He talk'd of nothing but the Displeasure of ARIDANOR, and the Reproaches of BARSINA, and seem'd more to upbraid than pity the Effect of their once fervent Love. It is needless to say how terrible a shock this must be to a Woman, who, in such a Circumstance expects Consolation only and certainly deserves it from the Man to whose fatal and undoing Artifices she is indebted for her approaching Misery. Tis easy to imagine she felt all that Ingratitude, and Tenderness abused could inflict yet would not the Mildness of her Nature suffer her to say any thing which could be called severe but, when he desired, that both for his and her own fake she would keep it secret, Alas! cry'd she, are Impossibilities to be expected from me? Am I not in the House with my Sister, from whose penetrating Judgment I might as well hope to blind the Eye of Heaven, as hide it long.—— And when, or how can I remove? What pretence have I for leaving her? Or, if I could invent one, to whom should I apply? I have no Acquaintance here, no Bosom Friend, to whom I might impart the Mystery, and expect relief. Something must be done, replied he coldly and tho' the management of such Affairs is more properly the business of your Sex, than ours, I will endeavour to find some Person with whom you may remain  but should the Secret be made known,  think it will be infinitely less vexatious to us both, to have the Suspicion light on any other Man than me. — It may occasion a Breach between ARIDANOR and BARSINA, which never, perhaps, will be made up would have you, therefore, dear ALMIRA! entirely to conceal your Tenderness for me, or that I feel for you.
But this, pursued he, perceiving she was bursting into tears at his words, is all but supposition.—I hope we may order it so, that all those from whom we would conceal it, should have no conjecture of the reason which induces you to remove, which yet you need not think of for a long time.
  Reflecting within himself, that he had not at the first discovery of this Event, behaved with that softness which he ought to have done, he endeavour d to repair that Fault, by saying a great many kind and tender things to her. But alas! the little Compassion he had testified for the Ruin he tad brought on her, had already pierced her Heart too far, for all the Fondness that he could afterwards express, to remove. She rightly judged, that those Emotions of the Mind, which in a surprize the unguarded Soul sends forth, are more to be believ'd than all the Tongue can speak, when Recollection has given room for Artifice and contemplating her Condition with Eyes unprejudiced, she saw the misery of it, nor could be blind to that prospect of mingled Infamy and Horror, which open d itself to her affrighted View.
  Her Griess, join'd to those Disorders natural to Women in the like Circumstances, threw her into such a deep Melancholy and Indisposition, that she was unfit for Company she kept her Chamber, and even there avoided being seen as much as possible, even by any of the Family  she fancied that whoever look'd on her would guess the occasion of her alter'd Countenance, and gave way to so terrible a Despair, that had it been of long continuance, rhust certainly have ended in Madness. Her refusing sometimes, even to admit her Sifter, made IDOMEUS not attempt going into her Chamber not that he doubted her readiness to accept his Visit, but he thought that to be received when all the World beside Were denied, would look too partlc.tu lar not to cause inspection into the reason of so strange a Behaviour. Being vex'd at the heart at her proceeding in this manner, he writ a Letter of Advice to her, which one day, when with BARSINA he was fitting with her, he stipt into her hand unperceiv'd by that unsuspecting Lady. The Contents of it were as follows To the Lovely ALMIRA. 
'XTY do you express a Terror lest
'VV y°ur Secret should be divulg'd, and at the same time take the most effectual means to make it so? — Can any thing be more contrary to Prudence than your Behaviour? Will not your alter'd Looks put People on an enquiry into the occasion ? —And that unusual Sadness which sits upon your Brow, convince them that there is something more than Indisposition in the case ? —Why, my Dearest! have 'you so little regard either of yourself, Or  me? You fancy your Condition infinitely worse than it is How many Ladies  have been, and doubtless are now in the  same, yet retain their accustomed Gaiety and pass unsuspected by the most diligent observers? For Heaven's fake call your Reason to your aid, and consider what it is you do, and what it is you would avoid. It is yet a long time before the Mystery is in any danger, but from yourself, of being made known , and you may depend on my Care to take such measures as shall secure your Reputation, and afford you all the Consolation you can wish. Resume, therefore, your former Sprightliness, and let those Eyes which first lit up my Love, still shine, and bless me with their chearing Glances.—Nor let any Jealousy of Love disturb thy gentle Soul. Believe me, my Adorable, thou art now as dear, as charming to my ravish'd Thoughts, as in the extatic moment of our first Enjoyment. How cruel are you then, to anticipate the worst that Time or Age could do! n— HOW many blissful Hours have we lost by this unkind Retirement! Scarce could I suffer more, wer't thou inconstant! Throw off then a Sadness so much an Enemy to Love, to thy Reputation, and to our mutual Contentment and let us once more hasten to those Joys which only Aiou canst give, and none can be capable of receiving in a manner more sublime, than,
 My Foreverlov'd ALMIRA'S 
  Most passionately Devoted, 
 And Faithful 
 IDOMEUS. 
  P. S. 'As a Proof of that Tenderness you have so often sworn, I again entreat you will let me see you in publick to'morrow, which is the only means that can secure us that Happiness in private, which I still flatter myself you languish 'for, with the same Ardour you once confess'd, and I still feel. Adieu! my Charmer.
  As the chief reason of that Discontent which had seiz'd upon her Spirits, was the belief that she was now grown indifferent to the dear Ruiner, the hope that she had wrong'd him by an unjust Suspicion, dissipated the greatest part of it and as her Despair decreased, the force of Reason strengthen' d itself in her. She saw, indeed, that she had taken wrong steps for the concealment of what she so much fear'd should be discover'd, and wonder'd how she could have been so lost to Thought, as to be guilty of it. A thousand and a thousand times fne kiss'd the dear Testimony of her Lover's Truth, and resolv'd not to delay Obedience to the purport. She therefore order'd her Woman, that same Evening, to let her Sister know that she was better, and desired her Company which that affectionate Lady rejoicing to hear, went to her immediately, and found her even beyond ExO  pectation pectation in so short a time recovered. The next day she dined at table with the Family, and some Strangers, who happen'd to be there that day.
 The Gardens belonging to the Palace of ARIDANOR being extremely pleasant, they all adjourn'd to pass some part of the Midday's. Heat in those refreshing Groves As they were walking up an Alley, which led. to that delightful Recess to which they Were going, ARIDANOR, who happen'd to be behind ALMIRA, saw that in plucking a Handkerchief out of her Pocket, she dropped a Paper which he stooping hastily .to take up, with a design to restore to her, he saw it was his Brother's Hand. The Surprize he was in, to fee it in a Direction to a Lady, who, till she came to live at his House, he never had the least acquaintance with, and since had Opportunities too frequently for speech to have any occasion that he could think on to employ his Pen, .made him alter his design of returning it to her and as none in the company saw him take it up, he put it into his Pocket, resolving to inform himself of this Secretand imagining there must be something more than ordinary in it, he soon made an Excuse for leaving his Guests, and retired to his Closet for the satisfaction of his Curiosity. I doubt not but my Reader easily be lieves this Letter was that which IDOMEUS had writ to the disconsolate ALMIRA, .to persuade her to take other measures than those her late Sorrows had obliged her to' give into, and indeed was the only one he had at that time ever written to her. It is impossible to know whether Astonishment or Vexation was the most predominant in the Mind of ARIDANOR, at this Explanation of his Sister's, till now, mysterious Griefs, or if he more condemned his Brother for his Attempt on a Woman so nearly related to his Wife, or her for taking so little care to conceal what had pass'd between them. IDOMEUS has reason to accuse her, said he to himself, as soon as he had done reading , would any Woman, possess'd of the smallest share of Sense, have acted as she has done? Her Melancholy, her Disorders, which she scarce aim'd at disguising, might, without the help of this Letter, had we not all been blinded by our good Opinion, have let us into the whole Secret? Twas Wrong in him, however, to engage in an Intrigue with the Sister of BARSINA, nor can I easily forgive him for the Disquiets it may possibly create.
  He was for some time divided' in his Sentiments, whether he should take any notice of the Discovery he had made, or not but fearing it might be further blaied, through! Negligence, or Imprudence, at last resoiv'd   not not to conceal it. As he was in these Cogitations, his Brother, who wondred at his leaving the Company in so abrupt a manner, came to seek him he found him with the Letter in his hand, which, as soon as he saw him enter the Room, he threw to him, telling him he ought to be more careful to whom he writ and since he had been guilty of so great a Fault, in a Family where nothing but the utmost Respect was owing from him, he should at least have warned the Person with whom he committed it, to be more cautious of his and her own Secret. These Words, and the fight of the Paper, so much confounded him, that for some moments he was wholly bereft of Speech and when he had the ule of it, was little able to employ it in any Arguments, which might excuse what he had done. ARIPANOR, however, continued not long the Severities with which he had accosted him  he could not heartily condemn that in his Brother to which himselfhad but too great a Propensity, and more frequently indulg'd than check'd.——And as his greatest Perplexity was, lest what had happen'd should come to the knowledge of BARSINA, he charged him to behave to ALMIRA in such a manner, as should prevent her from giving any cause of Suspicion, either through Inadvertency, or Design. They had a long Conversation together gcther on this Subject, which, at their return to the Company, ARIDANOR excused, by saying, he had just received some Letters from the Country, which required an immediate dispatch in answering. But the first time IDOMEUS found himself alone with ALMIRA, he gently reproved her for the omission she had been guilty of, in not burning his Letter, which he told her he had found, his Brother having defired she might not know he was in the Secret. Suppose, said he, that BARSINA, or ARIDANOR, had taken it up, it was but our Goodfortune which prevented our Secret from being discover'd by those from whom 'tis most our Interest to conceal it  they were both in company when the fatal Scroll dropp'd from your Pocket, and might have seen it as well as I. Poor ALMIRA trembled all the timehe was speaking, and could not for a good while get over the Horror it involv'd her in, but even to think how near she had been to what she most dreaded This danger made her readily agree with him to be more cautious and circumspect than they had been, to be less frequently alone together than formerly, and on no occasion whatever to behave in a manner whkh could awaken Observation to a Scrutiny into their Dispositions. IDOMEUS did not fail to acquaint his Brother with the Discourse which had O pass'd between them, and the Resolutions which both of them had taken to regulate their future Conduct yet was he nor perr lectly at ease he knew very well, that to keep the Condition in which AIMIRA was, eternally a Secret, there were a million of Chances against one and could not defend himself from the Apprehensions he .was daily persecuted with, This Accident serv'd to let him know, that BARSINA was more dear to him, than he himself was sensible of before since, it was the sole fear of giving her disquiet, which occasioned so much in his own Breast.
  To make the Proverb good, which says, That one Vexation seldom arrives without being attended by others while he was struggling with that which the knowledge of IDOMEUS'S Intiigue had given him, he received no inconsiderable Addition to it, through the Jealousy of ZELINDA. That Lady, as well as others, had heard the Story, at which the whole Court diverted themselves, of ARIDANOR having been lock'd up in the Closet of ISMONDA and remembering that she had formerly observ'd he had treated her with a Complaisance, which might very well be taken for Love, and that of late they had seem'd to shun each other's Presence, and if they met, behav'd with a Coldness and Disrespect. unbecoming of either of their Characters in reality, she made no doubt but there was an Amour, and that perceiving it grew talk'd of, they had agreed to affect this Indifference in publick, that the Fondness which in private they indulged, might be less liable
to Suspicion. She had an extraordinary
opinion of herself, and thought that when she condescended to favour a Man in the manner she had done ARIDANOR, he ought to banish all former Impressions from his Soul, and devote it wholly to her. But resolving to be fully affur'd, that he was false, before she gave him any Prooss that she was jealous, she carefully observ'd all his Words and Actions, when in the presence of ISMONDA , but that indrawn notice of his Eyes, which was occasion'd by Resentment, and the Fears of relapsing into his former Passion, she took for the Effects of Caution, and imagin'd he look'd not on her, because sensible he could not look on her without discovering too great a Tenderness In fine, every thing she heard, every thing she saw, more confirming her that the report of the Amour between them was not without reason she was beginning to consider in what terms she should reproach him, and more expose her Rival to the Ridicule of the Court. She happen'd to be alone in the PalaceGardens one Evening, indulging her humour, when she saw ARIDANOR pass swiftly by, unseeing her, and go di rectly irectly to the Gate which led into the Wilderness. The Solitude of the Place which he saw him enter, and the haste he made to arrive at it, had very much the Air of an amorous Rendezvous, and she bless'd her good Stars for giving her this opportunity of detecting him. She confider'd not long therefore, what it was she had to doi but following the Path he took, was in the Wilderness a very few Minutes behind him She left not a Grotto unsearch'd all the way she went but Fortune not yet directing her to the right, so much time was spent, that she disappointed not the Persons she sought, of accomplishing the Intent they had in meeting. Tis impossible to express how much Vexation this Reflection gave her t but resolving to make herself amends, by the Revenge she would hereafter take on the Reputation of her Rival, she prosecuted her search and being at last come to that place, which was in reality the Scene of their stolen Joys, she saw ARIDANOR come out of the most dark and shady Recess the whole Wilderness afforded, and to her unspeakable Surprize, not ISMONDA, but ELARIA in his hand.
  Never were any Persons more cover'd with Confusion than were these three'tis difficult to say which of them had the greatest share of itEMRIA at perceiving her Amour was discover'd  ARIDANOR that it was so, by the very Woman, from whom, next his Wife, he would most carefully have conceal'd it or ZELINDA, at finding herself mistaken in the Object of her Jealousy. This Lady, however, had the advantage of first being able to recollect herself, and with the most scornful and malicious Smile she could put on, accosted ARIDANOR in these terms I thought to have found you in other Company, my Lor d,Jaidshe not could I have bcliev'd,without having been convinc'd of it by my own Eyes, that a Girl so unexperiene'd in Conversation as ELARIA is, could attract a Man of your Lordship's nice Goust half a minute much less could I have thought continued she, turning her Eyes on ELARIA, whose Face through shame and anger was dfdall over with a scarlet blush that the Modesty of my seemingly innocent Cousin would have sufFer'd her to make amorous Appointments. Heavens! cry'd she, How could you be so indecent, so horridly wicked, as to commit such an Action in the face of the Sun? If Love be a Crime, reply'd ARIPANOR, vex'd to the very Soul, I know not why it should be absolv'd at one time more than another .
Circumstances indeed may very much extenuate or alleviate the Guilt, and you know very well, Madam! that there are some Ladies who think that Passion is in itself an excuse for breaking through the strictestTyes. Let us talk no more, therefore, I beseech you of this matter, ELARIA is perfectly innocent of what you seem to accuse her. I met her here by chance, and thinking it unbecoming in a Lady of her Age to give way to those Reflections the Melancholy of this solitary Place inspires, offer'd my Service to conduct her back to the Palace. Extremely well, resum'd BELINDA peevishly and your Lordlhip too came here to indulge Chagrin? But now I think on't, that may possibly be true , you like being alone sometimes, or you would not have had patience to have been lock'd up for two long hours in the Closet of Ismonda.——You fee, my Lord, added she, seeing him look prodigiously amaz'd at these Words, that I have a perfect Intelligence of your Amours, and it must be confess'd indeed, that you are a Man of admirable Address to carry on ib many different ones at the same time, all too with Women of the Court, and yet preserve yourself from the Effects of Jealousy. Jealousy, Madam! answer d he , if I gave cause for it, it would be of little service to the Woman who testify'd it to a Man of my Disposition and I would, above all things, have her who thinks my Esteem worthy of her regard, to abstain from that pernicious Passion, 'tis the very poison of Love nor would I search for Pleasure in a Bed of Snakes, tho' cover'd with a VENUS. Most Heroically indeed, said BELINDA, you assert the Prerogative of your Sex and since you are of this humour, I congratulate your Choice from the tame humble Spirit of ELARIA you fear no Reproaches perhaps she thinks your Love, at least the show of it, so great a Favour, that she ought not to repine at the share you bestow of it on others—But, continu’d she, with the utmost spite, sot fear she should not enough know how to express her Gratitude, ORSAMES shall instruct her what to do, nor will I delay one moment acquainting him with the Honour his Family receives in the deference you pay his Daughter.  hope then, Madam! answer d he, provokd beyond measure at this Menacei that you will not forget to inform him also, that however ELARIA may have prov'd, there are other Ladies of his Family who do not love Ingratitude, and chuse rather to confer Favours unask'd, than refuse them when they are the Merit of a long Service. ZELINDA could not avoid hearing this Reproach, tho she seem'd not to do so and having turn'd upon her heel just as she had concluded the Words already repeated, was tripping away as fast she could when he began to speak, and turn'd not back to continue a Conversation in which she had little reason to expect she should have the better. Poor
  Poor ELARIA, who all the time she had been there, had not utter'd a Syllable, not dared, through Fear and Shame, scarce to lift up her Eyes, now turn'd them on her dear Undoer and pouring forth at the same time a torrent of Tears, What will become of me, my Lord ? said she this cruel Woman will certainly betray me, and I no more can fee my Father's face. This Lamentation was more cutting to ARIDAKOR, than all the Raillery of the other had been, not only that he was really concern'd for what might happen, through the Pride and Jealousy of her offended Rival, but also that this Demand included something of a Dependance on him, which was no ways pleasing to him. Disguising therefore all the fears he had of ZELINDA'S making good her Threats, Why are you terrify'd, my dear ELARIA? said he Your Cousin will not certainly be so base as to expose you, nor can I think she would be the bearer of a Theme sa unwelcome to a Father's ear.
Besides, she can at most but have a suspicion of our Amour, and will not venture to make what is in her but bare Imagination, pass on cithers for current Truth. Depend on it, continued be, finding her still unsatisfy'd, there is nothing in what you apprehend, nor do I foresee any Consequence from this Meeting, half so bad as the present Discomposure of your Mind. Clear up then, then, my Angel, thy drooping Spirits, and believe  surfer more in the sight of thy Disorders, than any thing which can ensue will make thee feel.
  He pursued his Endeavours to reassure her all the way they walk'd together, and being come within the Garden, he took leave and separated, because the Walks were at that time very full of Company. BARSINA and ALMIRA, with some other Ladies, appear'd at a little distance to whom he immediately join'd himself, as did EL ARIA with two or three who she saw together of her acquaintance.
  But too true a Presage had this unhappy Beauty of her approaching Misfortune  At her coming home, she found ZELINDA there before her, and by her Countenance, as well as by the mingled Grief and Indignation which she beheld in that of both her Parents, immediately knew the Evil she so much dreaded, had in reality befallen her. The Servants, who at her entrance into the Room, were waiting, being dismiss'd, she continu'd not a moment in suspence. ORSAMES, with all the marks of the mostvio. lent Fury in his Voice and Eyes, took her .by the trembling Arm, and accosted her in these Terms Is it possible, said he, that thou cantt so much degenerate from thy Mother's Virtue, and thy Fathers Spirit, as to submit thy self the Slave of base Desires? and forgetful of thy own and House's HOnour, yield to become the loose Diversion of an idle Hour, and fit Society for none but such as live by Prostitution? Speaks.tursu'd he, growing more fierce, as by her 'Tears and Tremblings he found more reason to believe the .Truth of what he had heard art thou this Wretch ?——Hast thou at once cast off all Sense of Honour, Virtue, and Reputation? With infinite. difficulty, she at last fainxly answer'd, No but was unable to bring forth more and the griev'd Father still persisting in his Reproaches, which were seconded by the more peircing, if pos siblc, Sorrows of a most tender Mother, struck so deeply to the fair Offender's Heart, that she fell fainting at their feet, happy, in a short Cessation, from the Pangs of Thought, and the just Sense of her forlorn Condition and the sad State to which she had reduced Parents to whom she had been so dear.
  Never was a Scene more moving, the mournful Mother weeping o'er her ruin'd Offspring the unhappy Father divided between Grief, and Rage, and Pity Revilings fill'd his mouth, but the fast Sighs which every now and then broke in upon his Words, and stopp'd the struggling Accents, declar'd there was a stock of Tenderness Within, which would not suffer him to forget it was his darling Daughter he was about to curse with sudden starts like those which Frenzy causes, he stood and gaz'd on the still dear, tho' ruin'd Beauty, while the no less afflicted, tho more patient Mother, was with ZFXINDA, employing their ut. most care to recover her from the Swoon which conscious Guilt and Shame had thrown her in. As soon as she came to herself, Alas! my dear Cousin, said ZELINDA to herhow griev'd am I to fee you thus!—' yet I could not resolve to see you persevere in a Conduct so dishonourable to yourself and Family, without informing those of it, who only can oblige you to regulate it for the future. You know, that when first you made me the Confidante of your unhappy Passion for this destructive ARIDANOR,  did not fail to set before your Eyes the danger of giving way to itI reminded you of his being married, and of the Gaity of his Humour, which would not suffer him to lose any opportunity you should give him of taking an advantage over you You promis'd then to take my Counsel, and while I hoped you did, forbore to utter the least syllable of what I knew but you have now undone yourself in every Circumstance , and would to Heaven, added she, with a feign d Sigh, I were the only Person about Court to whom your Secret were divulg'd but vou have been too publick in your Amour, not to have made even BARSINA herself suspect it.
  In this manner, under the pretence of Friendship and Concern for her, did she go on persecuting her unfortunate Cousin, and while she seem'd to pity the Condition of so near a Relation, secretly triumph'd in exposing a Rival who, too artless and unexperienced in Deceit, had nothing to answer which coii'd make her be thought less guilty than lhe had been represented and the perplexd ORSAMES, and her troubled Mother, had from her own Behaviour but too many Confirmations of the Truth of what they had been told by ZELINDA. Resolving therefore to put a period to an Affair so offensive to Virtue and to their Honour, they sent her down to a Relation they had in a far distant Country, ordering her to be strictly watch'd and kept there, and even deny'd the privilege of Ten or Paper, to the end that she might have no means of informing ARIDANOR of the place of her abode, or encourage him to attempt any thing for the recovering her.
  But, alas! this last part of the Charge they gave, might have been spared the Passion of ARIDANOR had already had its fill, and had no longer those impatient Longings, which put Men on combating with the greatest Difficulties for the Gratification. He was, indeed, infinitely vex'd, thaÆELiNDA had so much reason to suspect her Cousin had given him the same Prooss of an ungovernable Tenderness which herself had done, because he doubted not but that her Jealousy, join'd with that natural Propensity most Women have to expose the Faults of each other, would make her disclose this to as many as Ihe was acquainted with.
 ELARIA was no sooner sent away, than he was inform'd of it by she who had occasion' d it If I have not the power over your Affections, said she haughtily, you fee I can over those you have preferred to me ELARIA is gone to a place, whence all your Love will not afford you the means to bring her back. This News was far from being so great a trouble to him, as ZELINDA imagin'd it would beand taking this opportunity, which her Jealousy gave him, of being rid of both at once, he told her, that he loved Tranquillity too well, to part with it on any consideration that he would not be made uneasy by the Caprice of any Woman and that, in fine, he found so much trouble in Intrigue, that he would, for the future, confine his whole Desires in the compass of BARSINA'S rms. . These Words were like a Thunderclap to the Ears of her to whom they were address'd who, expecting no such matter, and still finding too many Charms in him to consent to part with him, endeavour'd to excusc the Rashness of her Jealousy, and protested she would no more pry into his Amours, or attempt to disturb him in the pursuit of any thing in which he propos'd a Pleasure. ARIDANOR wanted not Goodnatureand seeing she had submitted to his Humour so much beyond what he could have imagin'd fropi one of hers, he thought it too much to humble her Spirit, and make miserable her Love at the same time and taking her in his Arms, assur'd her he would not cftily forgive what she had done on the score of EL ARIA, but also continue his Affections to her, with the same Tenderness ind Ardour as before. Now was she as happy in her own Imagination, as she had made her Rival wretched but how long Fate permitted her this Blessing, we shall hereafter discover. The chief Subjects of our History, THEODORE and ISMONDA, at present claim our Attention, and require we should look into the means by which they were extricated from that Labyrinth of Perplexities, in which we lately left them bewilder'd and involv'd. The good Princess, extremely troubled at the Report which was spread abroad of her Favourite, delay'd not to acquaint her with what she had heard And the Vexatiori ISMONDA conceiv'd at so unlopk'dsor an. Injury to her Reputation, had been insupportable, had it not been sweeten'd by the belief, that this it was which occasional the late change in the behaviour of the Prince toward her and that it was not to the want of Constancy in him, but the Jealousy he had of hers, she ow'd the'Estrangement which for some days had been between them. She attested her Innocence with all the Asseverations which her desire of being clear'd could suggests and fearing that every thing which came from. herself might be liable to Suspicion, entreated her royal Mistress to put the same Questions to ARIDANOR as she had done to her No, no, said she, I am enough convine'd by what yourself assures me but if I were not so, should little depend on what a Lover should alledge in the Vindication of a Mistress  doubt not but ARIDANOR has honour enough rather to endure the reproach of not having been able to please a Lady, than boast the Favours he receives from her, to the prejudice of her Reputation. After some little time being past in these kind of Discourses, ISMONDA retir'd to her own Apartment, to ruminate on what she had heard, and consider what means were best for her to, make use of, in order to undeceive the Ofince from the unjust Opinion she now not doubted but he had entertain'd of her. And not haying any opportunity of holding a long ConverP  fauon. sation, he having refrain'd visiting her of late, she resolv'd to write to him in such a manner, as should engage him to come, if, with his good opinion of her Conduct, he had not also thrown off all the Tenderness he once had for her. Nothing being so terrible to a Woman of Spirit as Sufpence, she delay'd not to enforce the Certainty of her Fate, by employing her Pen to him in this manner.
ISMONDA to THEODORE, the dear Sovereign of her Soul, and only Ruler of all her Thoughts, her Words, and Affions, TTTHAT Terrors, O thou Life of all. 'VV y J°ys' what a wild Maze of 'Fears, and Doubts, and Jealousies, and dismal Apprehensions, have you suffer'd me to be involv'd in! What from your aker'd Looks and Absence could I 'conjecture, but that I was undone, my 'Love grown tasteless, and my Form unpleasing to your Eyes? 'Tis but this moment that I had room to hope it 'was not so, and bless the happy Scandal 'which gives me leave to think 'tis not Indifference, or Hate, that keeps you from me Be angry, be jealous, but still retain your Love my Innocence and unshaken Faith will, some time or other, find the way to chase the two former Passions from your Breast, but the latter, if once lost, is never to be retriev'd.
The Princess, more kind than THEODORE, has inform'd me of the Aspersions thrown on me on ARIDANOR'S score. Oh, Prince! could you believe me guilty ?— But I will not accuse you, but myself, for not revealing to you sooner the whole History of that Affair, which has occasioned me this Taint in my Reputation, and you these needless Jealousies.
Think, I conjure you, my dear Prince  but sure I need not remind you of it  would I have forsaken the faithful Arms of fond ADRASTUS, my native Country, and unnumbred Friends, forfeited that Virtue which from my Youth I strictly had preserved, and run so imminent a Hazard of losing my Character, equally precious with my Life  would I have done all this to purchase THEODORE'S Affection, if I had thought it so mean a Blessing, as to consent to part with it in exchange for ARIDANOR? O, 'tis an Injury to my Understanding, as well as to my Truth, to imagine, that, after thee, there is any thing in the whole Sex beside, capable of attracting my Regard. Haste then, and do me justice.  live not but for thee, and if so wretched to be depriv'd of that only Aim, only Ambition of my desiring Soul, thy Love, shall return to Anatoliay and die, as I have liv'd,
  MY ADOR'D Theodore's, 
 EVER PASSIONATELY FAITHFUL, 
ISMONDA.
  She sent this by a Page, whose Fidelity she had experiene'd, ordering him to observe when the Prince was retiring to his Closet, as it was his Custom to do every Evening, and deliver the Paper into his own hands. He fail'd not to obey punctually the Directions she gave him, and instead of losing any time in writing, he sent her back for answer, by word of mouth, that in half an hour he would see her at her own Apartment,' There needed no more to convince this perfect Lover of her Truth, than telling him so he had this just opinion of all great Spirits, that whatever Faults they may be guilty of, they never arc of Insincerity, and that her's was of that kind, he had had a thousand Instances. He now gave to the Winds his late Distrust, and if he had any Uneasiness, it was in the reflection how much he had been to blame, to give any entrance to a Passion so mean as Jealousy. 
Her rightly applying the cause of his estranging himself in the manner he had done tor some days, was a new Charm to his transported ported Soul.  How much beyond Sex, in every thing, is that Woman! said he to himself how far from their little Doubts, and impertinent Apprehensions! She fees into the most hidden Meanings, and never judges but with almighty Reason.— And then again would he cry out, How unworthy am I to possess such Excellence, who could suspect her for any thing less than she appears?—She is above Hypocrisy, or the meaner views of vulgar Spirits, and in every Action denotes a generous and disinterested Flame, and that not the Royalty, but the Terson of the happy THEODORE, was the Object of her Affections.
  With these rapturous Reflections did he entertain'himself while alone but when they met, where is the Pen which can describe the mighty Joy! The Pleasures of Reconciliation between Lovers is unspeakable, unconceivable but by those who have felt what 'tis to have the swelling Heart long torn with anxious Doubts, and fired with Jealousy, at once restor'd to Peace, to Happiness, and all that Heaven of Felicity which mutual Love affords. Such was the state this blissful Pair now shar'd, and never had rewarded Passion fill'd them with Extafies more divine, more insupportable to staggering Sense! They were so great, they scarce were to be borne, and to have been more, must have been fatal. So little is Humanity capable of sustaining the Emotions of the Spirit, were there not Bars by Nature planted to restrain its force.
 
  In the first Truce from speechless Transports, and tumultuous Blisses, ISMONDA recounted. to him the whole History of the Persecutions she had received from ARIDANOR, and the reason of her concealing him in the Closet , but by what means this came to be known, neither of them could imagine. No body could think that ARIDANOR had so little Honour, as to mention such an Adventure, had it terminated to his advantage, much less when it happen'd so much the contrary. And the Fidelity of LYSETTA, who was the only Person whom ISMONDA had trusted with that Affair, had been too much experienced, to permit a doubt on her fide. It gave also some little Discontent to THEODORE, to be told that their Amour was suspected, especially by a Person, who, being an unhappy Rival, might suffer the Dictates of his Malice, to overcome those of his Generosity but ISMONDA soon eas'd him of those Apprehensions, by telling him, that she had obscrv'd a more than ordinary Familiarity between him and BELINDA that she was more than half assured, there was an Intimacy between them and that he had now forgotten the Passion he formerly profess'd for her, and the Treatment he had receiv'd from her. It was easy indeed at this time, to drive all Considerations, which were uneasy, from a Mind which resolv'd to devote itself wholly to Love and Pleasure. He spoke of it no more, and the remaining moments they pass'd together, were only taken up with mutual Endearments.
  To add to the Contentment of this once more happy Prince, he receiv'd news from MARMILLIO, that LUTETIA was not only brought to bed, but also, that the Child she went with expired almost as soon as born, and that that Favourite had made a considerable progress in the Task enjoin'd him, of reconciling her to the thoughts of being no longer of service to the pleasure of her Prince. All dangers of any discovery from that quarter being pretty well over, he resolv'd, for the future, never to be guilty of any thing, which, if ISMONDA were witness of, would cause any Interruption in their Love. He had nothing now to apprehend, but on the score of EURIDICE and DORASP E continually solliciting him to inT fluence ARBANES to consent to their Nuptials before those of IRENE with ERNESTUS could be celebrated he thought it best to yield to his Entreaties, and at the same time oblige himself, by seeing that Lady disposed of, in a manner which would take from her the power of expressing a Tenderness derness which laid him under a Necessity of dissembling with her yet still retaining a desire of delivering MARMILLIO from the same Troubles himself had been involv'd in, he oblig'd DORASPE to sign the Articles of Marriage for IRENE with ERNESTUS, bedsore he mention'd the Affair to ARBANES. But that being done, the other was well pleased to consent to the promotion of his Neice, not doubting but that of his Son would immediately ensue. DORASPE was transported at the Concession, ARBANES well satisfied, EURIDICE was the only Person who expressed any Reluctance , and it was not without ten thousand Vows, and well-dissembled Ardours of continued Tenderness, that THEODORE at last persuaded that Lady to yield to be. another's, that flic might with the more security be also his. Every thing, however, being at last agreed on, the Day for the Wedding was appointed, and all necessary Preparations were order'd to make it magnificent, and becoming the Quality of DORASPE, and the passionate Affection he had for EURIDICE. 
  But as if the love of Intrigue was to be inspir'd in all who came to the Court of Caramania, CLEOMENES, the Brother of MARMILLIO, who since the supposed Disgrace of that Favourite, was obliged to be continually there, because the Prince could wish less suspicion both give and receive Letters through his means, than any others became extremely enamour'd with ATTALINDA, the Wife of a certain Nobleman, distinguish'd by the Title of The Good natured Lord. What first gave it him, was, that happening to find a most passionate Loveletter directed to his Wife, and also Thanks for having received some Favours beyond what could be taken for the effects of an ordinary Complaisance, he put it into his Pocket very carefully and the first time he was alone with her, return'd it to her without the least Marks of Jealousy or Ill-humour saying only, My Dear, I wish you would be more careful of Papers of this nature. 'Twas ivell it fell into no other hands than mine. 
 

  —If it had, I know not what might have become of your Reputation. 
His Valet, who happen'd to be in the next Room, and overheard what pass'd between them on this score, thought the manner of his Behaviour so very extraordinary, that he could not forbear relating it to some of his Intimates, they to others, and so on, till it became a Jest, not only through the Court, but the whole Town.
  This Story, of which CLEOMENES was inform'd, gave him encouragement to .hope he should not be unsuccessful in .his Amour. What more could a Lover wish, than such a Proof of the easy Temper of. the Husband he would Impose upon and the amorous Disposition of the Wife he would seduce! The Beauties of ATTALINDA no longer gave him Pain, bur Pleasure because he look'd upon her as already won, even before he had an opportunity of attempting it, which he imagin'd was all that was necessary to make him master of his utmost Desires. But, in spite of the hopes with which he flatter'd himself, he found it not so easy a matter as he had imagin'd, to get the liberty of speaking to her alone she was scarce ever to be seen without ARSINOE with her and the presence of that Lady, who declar'd herself a profess'd Enemy to Intrigue, and all the Diversions of the gay World, gave him many disappointments, when he came fully prepared with Arguments, and Assurance to back them, for the declaration of his Passion. The little conformity which there appear'd to be in the Notions of these Ladies, the one always alert and cheerful, the other grave, formal and precise, made every body wonder at the Intimacy between them, but CLEOMENES, who made it his business more than any other, to dive into the Reason, could not help believing, that the demure Countenance might be capable of concealing an Inclination which might render her no unfit Companion for the other, who more openly betray'd the Impulse of Desire. As he was one day ruminating within himself in what manner he should proceed, either to make a Confidante of this Shadow of his Mistress, or contrive some Stratagem which might render them less inseparable, a young Nobleman, called MAZARES, with whom he was extremely intimate, came to visit him and after some little discourse on ordinary Affairs, Dear CLEOMENES, said he, I have a Secret to disclose to you, but you must first swear to me never to reveal it and also, that you will assist me to get rid of a very troublesome business, which I have unwarily engaged in. I never knew People, replied he, make a Confidant of any one, without having some design in it. —They make it a favour that they trust us, but always require something of us which more than counterbalances the Pleasure of being privy to the Affair. But setting Raillery apart, pursued he, you need not doubt either my fidelity or readiness to oblige you in any thing in my power. I do not, resumed the other nor is the Task difficult, nor to a Man of your Constitution displeasing, that I would enjoin you. But not to keep you in suspence, you must know I have, for a considerable time, had an Intrigue with one of the finest Women about the Court, but the Affair is now grown old to me—I have had herso long, that she is become as insipid as a Wife yet does she not perceive it, but continues so surfeitingly fond, that I am quite sick of the very Name of Love and were it not that I have a sort of an Inclination to a very fine Woman that is continually with her, I should find some pretence or other to quarrel with her but such is my unhappy State, that I cannot fee ATTALINDA without her and am therefore compell'd to dissemble a Passion for the one, in hope the other will discover by my Eyes that I have a real one for her.
  ATTALINDA! cried CLEOMENES, more surprised than can be well express'd then it is ARSINOE whom you have possess'd, and are grown weary of. Your guess is right, anjwer d MAZARES , I have had her these two Months, and yet the unreasonable Creature expects I should meet her with the same warmth of Inclination, as when the Novelty of her Beauties hYd. See, continued he, what a Billet I receiv'd from her this morning! In speaking these words, he plucked a Letter out of his Pocket, and delivering it to CLEOMENES, he found it contain'd these words
To the dear Charmer of my Soul, the Accomplied M A Z A R E s.

 IsHave not closed my Eyes this Night. All my hours since last I law you, have been taken up with the cruel Reflections you caused in me. For Heaven's fake, what did you mean by saying you were obliged to go out of Town for a whole Month? Do you think it possible for me to live so long without you? Or that I can, with any tolerable degree of patience, think I have forfeited my Honour, for a Man who is capable of supporting such an Absence But I hope you spoke it with no other design than to make trial of my Love , for I cannot see that any Motives, unless it is Inclination, should necessitate your going.
However it be, I beg to be assured, and that you will not delay one moment the satisfaction I require. I am now a lone in my Chamber, whence I will not stir till I have your Answer.  Wish you would come yourself, and by your dear presence this Morning, make some reparation for the disquiets of the Night. 'If you are free from Company, let the Bearer conduct you to the impatient Arms of The Languishing  Arsinoe. 
  Good Heaven! erfd CLEOMENES, as soon as he had read it, who will hereafter trust a Woman when she professes Virtue !— The seemingly cold ARSINOE, write a Billet of this nature! .—scarce can I believe my Eyes! —Oh, replied the other, yourreserv'd and coy Women in publick, are ever the most warmly amorous in private. The Constraint they put on their Inclinations, in denying themselves those innocent Liberties which others take, makes them break out with greater force and vehemence, When once they give a loose to them. If you would chuse a Mistress, who, like Stmek, wishes to be clasp'd in Flames, seek her ambng the demure and the precise.—— The gay and chearful Girl, evaporates her Spirits in superficial Gallantries but the fly silent Maid longs for more substantial Joys, receives the Welcome Bliss with double eagerness, and never knows Satiety. But she can give it, interrupted CLEOMENES, laughing, or you would not complain of this Disposition in ARSINOE. 'Tis true, my Friend, replied the other, the Delights of Love, when pursued with too much violence at first, degenerate by swift degrees into Disgust.
 The Blessings which ARSINOE afforded, were too extravagant to last and what was once the highest Joy transported Nature was capable of receiving, is now become a Toil, a kind of Penance for pass'd Pleasures. I understand you, said CLEOMENES, you have entertain'd a new Desire, and for that reason would be glad to get rid of your Obligations to the old one. You have hit it, resumed MAZAR.ES, and you are the Person I have pitch'd on to do me this Service. I have many reasons to believe it is not me, but my Sex, that ARSINOE is in love with tho' did she really find any thing in me more agreeable than the generality of Mankind, I doubt not but the superior Perfections of CLEOMENES might, with a very little pains, oblige her to change her Sentiments in his favour. I will not return your Lordship's Compliment, said he, because 'tis natural to flatter the Vanity of those from whom we expect Favours. But, pray, of what use can I be to you in this Affair ? — You know ARSINOE and ATTALINDA are so perpetually together, that there is not a possibility of speaking to either of them, without making a Confidante of the other. As for that, I have laid a Scheme, replied MAZARES i we will go together this Afternoon, to visit ATTALINDA, where I know we shall find ARSINOE. YOU shall intreat the favour of the latter to give you leave to talk to her one moment in private on which shc will certainly take you info the Garden, or some other Room. You may then make what Pretensions you please to her and to second your Arguments, I will give you this Letter, which you may tell her I dropp'd by accident. Accuse me of want of that Care I ought tg have. Taken of her Reputation say any thing which Invention can supply you with, to render me unworthy of the happiness of her Love but be sure to make no mention of that I have for ATTALINDA. I am certain you may prevail on her as far as you please, if you follow these measures. At least, if you should fail in that, you will not in convincing me of your Friendship, and engaging my utmost Gratitude and Services. CLEOMENES, who, all the time he had been speaking, had been casting about in his mind, how to make the best Advantage of this Adventure for his own Designs, readily promised to do all that was desired of him and as soon as they thought it a proper hour, both went to the House of AttALiNdA, where, as MAZARES said, they found ARSINOE  but some other Ladies also being present, gave CLEOMENES an inexpressible satisfaction, that while he was entertaining ARSINOE, as he had agreed to do, the other would be deprived of the opportunity of making his Addresses to ATTALINDA. Nothing could be more surprized than was ARSINOE, at his desiring to speak to her in private she having no farther acquaintance with him, than by seeing him sometimes in the DrawingRoom,or at Church. She withdrew with him, however, to a Window, which was a considerable distance from the Companybut he not thinking it remote enough for what he had to say, Madam, cry'd he, I beg you would permit me to attend you to some other Place what I have to communicate, will, I fear, occasion some Disorders in you, which you will not think proper should be observ'd by so many Witnesses. Tho', said she, I cannot comprehend what business a Person so much a stranger to me, as CLEOMENES, can have with me, yet I shall make no scruple of list'ning to it, believing my Character and Reputation are too well known to you, to encourage you to entertain me in any manner which may be offensive to that strict Reserve and Modesty by which  regulate my Conduct. It was as much as he could do to restrain a Smile from breaking out at these words but composing his Countenance to as much Gravity as was possible, Would to Heaven, Madam, answered he, that all who have the blessing of conversing with you, were as zealous for your Honour as CLEOMENES will soon have an opportunity of proving himself. There needed no more to make her as impatient for going with him, as he express'd that she should do so. She found there was something mysterious couch'd in what he said, and was eager for an Explanation. She therefore led him into ATTALINDA'S Clolet, which happen'd to be open, and was at the end of a long Gallery, between which and the Room where they left the Company, were many others, which secured whatever pass'd from the hearing of any but themselves. But for the greater Surety, as soon as they enter'd, he made fast the Door which observing, she look'd a little confounded at, I beseech you, Madams said he, be not in any apprehensions of danger from my proceeding , what I do, is to preserve your Honour, not attempt a violation of it. In speaking these Words, he oblig'd her to sit down, and placing himself by her, immediately took out the Letter which she had written to MAZARES, and which that treacherous Lover had given him on purpose to show her.——Do you know the Contents of this, beautiful ARSINOE  said he. Let any one judge what a Woman who pretended to the severest Virtue, must feel at finding herself thus expos'd at first she rav'd, deny'd that she had ever written it, and cry'd it was a Plot contriv'd to blast her Reputation but CLEOMENES soon brought her to talk in another manner, by convincing her that he was but too well aflur'd of the Condescensions she had made MAZARES, relating to her many other particulars of her Behaviour to him, which made her know he must have had the whole History from that unfaithful Man. What, cry.d she, bursting into Tears,so soon as he had done speaking, is it possible that he should be so monstrous a Villain to betray the Faults his Perjury has made me guilty of! Oh wretched Woman, continu'd she, what will become of me? my Reputation, which is dearer to me than my life, is lost for ever. No, Madam, rewind she, I believe the Secret is only lodg'd in my Breast, which, be assur'd, I would suffer my Heart to be pluck'd thence, e'er I'll part with it. But wherefore, said she, for what Reason did he make you his Confidant  To reveal that, answer'd he, I must be as guilty to him as he has been to you but yet, continu'd he, after a little Tause, as tho he was divided in his Sentiments whether to proceed or not, I cannot suffer a Lady, such as the incomparable ARSINOE, to be injur'd in a manner so cruel and so base, without giving her warning of the Villany design'd against her, much less can I consent to be a sharer in the Guilt.— Know then, Madam, that all I hitherto have said, has been by his Commission—rHe is grown weary of your Charms, and would transfer the right you have given him over you to me, while he with greater liberty pursues the yet untasted Sweets of ATTALINDA'S Beauty. He bid me address you in the manner of a Lover, and to prepare your Heart for an Impression in my favour, permitted me to say whatever I thought fit, excepting only that of his Love to ATTALINDA, or that I came by the knowledge of your Amour with him from his own Mouth on all sides therefore you were to have been made the Property , but I have a Soul too honest to join in the Deceit have confess'd to you all the Truth of the Affair, and ask no other Recompence, than that you will not betray me to him Make your own use of what I have reveal'd, or to forget or reclaim the ungrateful Rover but let him not know that I entertain'd you with any other Discourse than that of my own Passion. You are as generous as he is the contrary, said she, nor shall you have reason to repent so disinterested a Proof of your Good nature But, pur slid she, looking kindly on him, is there no way by which I may return the Obligation? Yes, Madam! answer'd he, who having his head full of the Thoughts of ATTALINDA, did not presently fathom the meaning of what she said, 'tis greatly in your power to contribute to my Felicity I am not less sensible of the Charms of ATTALINDA than is MAZARES you have an influence over her, and by inclining her to favour me, you may doubly reward the Service I have done you, and, at the same time, punish my ungrateful Rival. Twas easy to perceive a visible Alteration in that Lady's Countenance at this Request. MAZAReS, answer'd she peevishly, has render'd himself equally unworthy of my Rcsentment, as of my LoveI despise the Wretch, nor from this moment will ever think of him but with the utmost contempt , r—but as for ATTALINDA, she is wholly taken up with young PHILARCHUS I wou'd not have you give way to Desires, which I am certain will be unavailing leave it to the vile M AZARES 
to love and to despair I would have you as happy as your good Qualities and Accomplishments deserve, which is infinitely more than ATTALINDA, were she kind, could make you for be assur'd, a distant view of her is best she has a thousand Imperfections, which disgust those who are permitted a nearer Conversation with her, nor would PHILARCHUS so long have devoted himself to her, were it not for the rich Presents she is continually making him which, to a Man of his narrow Fortune, are too acceptable not to engage the return she expects from them. But tell me, added she, taking him by the Hand, and gently pressing it, is there nothing else in which I can oblige you? Nothing, Madam! Answer’d he, by this time being perfectly inform'd what it was she aim'd at, in which I dare hope you will. You wrong me then, return'd she hastily, by Heaven thereis nothing in my power I will refuse you think, therefore, if there is no other Lady with whom I have an Interest, whose Love might make you happy  dare answer for her, whoever she be, she cannot long hold out against so many Charms as you are master of, especially when I shall repeat all your Perfections over to her in such Terms as cannot fail to raise Desire. Instruct me then which of the Train of Beauties that grace the Caramanian Court, you wou'd most gladly have in your Arms this moment  —I have sworn to do my utmost to bring her to you, and you need not doubt but I Will keep my Promise.
  ARSINOE was a very lovely Woman, and the new Passion with which she now was animated, added a fresh lustre to her Eyes, and a more lively red upon her glowing Cheeks CLEOMENES was naturally amorous, and when urg'd in this manner, must, indeed, not have been a modern Man, to have been without those Emotions she so plainly aim'd to inspire in him———They were alone the Door shut so many Temptations joining with that which Curiosity afforded, made him but little hesitate what Answer he should make he took her in his Arms, and crying, Who that had the privilege of chusing, not only in the Court of Caramania, but in the whole World be. iide, would think any but ARSINOE worthy his Regard, proceeded to Freedoms with her of that kind, which  must leave to the Reader's Imagination to represent j— I shall only say, that they were not displeasing to her, and, telling him further, that since he had her Vow, she could not refuse the Performance of it, if requir'd, yielded without even a shew of Reluctance to all he attempted, exacting from him only a Promise that her Reputation should be safe which he protesting to preserve inviolably, some moments were past in those Extasies, which, MAZARES had before acquainted him, were in the power of this Lady to bestow and to receive.
  At their return to the Company, whoever had been sensible in what manner they had pass'd the time of their absence, would have been surpriz'd to see much less appearance of Confusion in the face of ARSINOE, than in that of CLEOMENES relying on her Character, and the good Opinion her pretences to Virtue had establish'd in the World of her, made her enter with all the asturance that the most perfect Innocence could have worn but CLEOMENES could not restrain his Blushes at the sight of MAZARES and ATTALINDA, conscious of the Crime he had been guilty of to both, injuring the one by carrying to another some part of the Ardours he had vow'd to himself he would reserve entirely for her and betraying that which he had so faithfully promis'd the other to keep secret. MAZARES, however, who little suspected him either for his Rival, or Deceiver, was impatient to know the Event of his Conversation with ARSINOE, and therefore took leave of the Ladies in a short time. CLEOMENES having been introduced to their acquaintance but by his means, had no Excuse to stay behind him, and was necessitated to answer to all the Interrogatories made him by his Friend, before he had any time to reflect in what manner it was best for him to reply. He would not, however, let him know the sudden Conquest he had obtain'd over the Lady, who had that very moment sent so passionate a Declaration of Love to himself, lest the Pique it might give his Pride, might occasion him to reproach her with her Inconstancy, and by that means she also be provok'd to unravel the whole Discpurse between them concerning ATTALINDA. He told him, therefore, that he had found her not consenting to the Professions he had made her, nor yet not altogether so averse, as to give him any great occasion to fear he should not be able to do him the service he required, of easing him of the trouble of her Affections. MAZARES was perfectly contented with this Account, nor imagin'd there was any thing more had pass'd between them, than what he was acquainted with ARSINOE, as she had promised CLEQMENES, not breaking out into any Demonstrations of Rage, which might give him occasion to believe himself betray'd by the Person whom he had trusted.
  But in a very few days after, that Lady had an opportunity of venting the secret spite she had conceived against him. The longwish'd moment at last arriv'd, in which he told ATTALINDA that she was the dearest thing on Earth but nothing could be more unwelcome to her, than such a Declarationshe was herself too deeply engaged with PHILARCHUS, to think of any other Man, and also knowing him to have been the Darling of her dear Friend ARSINOE'S Soul, he of his whole Sex was the last by whom she would suffer herself to be address'd. She express'd her Sentiments on this occasion. with all the plainness imaginable, protesting she would acquaint his Mistress with his Ingratitude and Falshood nor did she fail to do as she had said and ARSINOE, glad to be told it by her, immediately writ him a Letter as full of Upbraidings as the other had been of Fondness, forbidding him ever to fee her more, and loading him with every opprobrious Name which witty Malice could invent. But her Indignation was now depriv'd of all its power of giving pain, and he could have been very merry with her Resentment, had he not discover'd by it that ATTALINDA was, in good earnest, resolv'd to put a period to his Hopes. He communicated this Letter, and the Conversation he had with ATTALINDA. which occasion'd it, to CLEOMENES, who had also his share of Pain and Pleasure in the hearing it delighted him above measure, that she had repuls'd him with so much Vigour but then the Apprehensions, that for the fake of her dear PHILARCHUS, she would also treat himself so on the like occasion, embitter'd all the Sweets of her Behaviour to his Rival and this Consideration, together with that of the Probability there was that ARSINOE would endeavour to prejudice him in the opinion of that Lady, made him defer for a time declaring the Passion he had for her but endur'd Agonies in this Restraint, which not all the Favours he receiv'd from ARSINOE could atone for.
  But while he was thus languishing for ATTALINDA, and but vainly endeavouring to forget her in the Arms of ARSINOE, an Adventure happen'd to him which, if it did not wholly engross his Thoughts, took up so much of 'em, at least, as to make him industrious for an Explanation of it. One day, when he was abroad, a Letter was left for him by an unknown Person, in which he found these Lines.
  To the Agreeable CLEOMENES. 
 TF your Eyes do not very much belye your Heart, there is a stock of amorous Inclinations there, which it is impossible possible for the faint Charms of ARSINOE to take wholly up assure you there is a Lady, who looks on the regards you pay the Leavings of MAZARES, with a secret Contempt of the Choice you have made. If therefore you do not think yourself bound to an eternal Constancy to one, who never had the least share of it in her own Soul, either to you or any 'other, cast your Eyes round the Circle, and give a proof of that Penetration you 'are so much fam'd for, by discovering in the Countenance the Heart which languishes for you. To direct your search, I must inform you that she is young, gay, a Woman of Quality, and, if the Opinion of the World may be taken, not unlovely. She is every day at Court, it was there she first be held you, and was charm'd and to take 'from you all fears that her Passion aims 'at Marriage, to which I know you have 'an Aversion, she is already wedded, and 'can have no other view, than to prove herself The most Lovely CLEOMENES'S most Passionately Devoted.
  There was nothing in this Billet more surprizing to him, than to find, that not only his Intrigue with ARSINOE was discovers, cover'd, but also, that she had been the Mistress of MAZARES. She was by the generality of the World, taken for a Woman of the most severe Virtue that could be, and how this kind Unknown came to have so perfect a knowledge of her Humour and Affairs, seem'd to him the most astonishing thing in nature. He sometimes imagin'd it had been written by herself to try his Constancy, but then the Hand being vastly different, and the little probability there was she would use any other in such a Business, made him reject that Supposition. The Earnestness with which he look'd in the Face of every Lady in the Drawing room, who had the least Conformity with the Person describ'd in the Letter, gave so much Diversion to her who wrote it, as half countervail'd the Vexation she was in, that he could not yet discover who she was.
  In this Dilemma we must leave them for a short time, the more material Affairs of their Superiors having now found a turn as perplexing as unlook'd for.

  The End of the Fourth Part. 

PART V
 
  ISMONDA had but just begun to taste the Sweets which Reconciliation yields, when a new and unexpected Interruption inform'd her no settled Tranquility could be hoped for, in an Amour so doubly criminal as was hers. She was fitting in her Closet indulging the delightful Contemplation of rewarded Love, and the Perfections of her admired THEODORE, when LVSETTA told her a Person desired to be admitted, who said he came from Anatolia, and was commission'd by ADRASTUS to attend her. Tho' at every Message from that injur'd Husband, she felt Emotions which only the Guilty are capable of knowing yet she was now seiz'd with an unusual Disorder, a Fluttering and Confusion of Spirit, which at that time she was unable to account for She order'd, however, that the Person who occasion'd it should be introduced, which as soon as he Was, he deliver d her a Letter, in which he found these Words.
  To my Regardless, but still Lov'd 
  ISMONDA.
'T T O W great my Disappointment was to see the Anatolian Lords return without you, I need not go about to describe you know too well the tender Passion of my Soul, to be ignorant that nothing could be more afflicting, more 'severe.—You gave me, however, a reason for your stay, which, if real, I ought to 'be pleas'd with, tho' I cannot approve little less of Policy, and more of Love, 'would have made me bless'd but that time is. past, and I will therefore add no 'more on what cannot be recall'd what is to come, is sufficient to take up all my Thoughts.—You have now no longer an excuse for absence, my Brother refuses to 'accept the Title of one of the Magiy and 'those Intercessions which have deprived 'me of you, are now as insignificant to my Interest, as they have been prejudicial to my Peace of Mind. beg, therefore, that you will set forward for Anatolia with all possible Expedition I have sent a Person to conduct you, un'der whose care you might trust yourself 'a much greater journey.— I can no
 longer
 

longer live without you, and should you by any vain Pretence endeavour to delude my impatient Wishes, I should, regardless of my Ruin, and forgetful of what I owe my Royal Master, come in Person to bring, you back—O therefore let me owe that to yourself, which else I am resolv'd to be in Possession of by my own Power, and that right the Law has given me over you. 
I now entreat you as a Lover, but would have you remember, that when I please, I may exert the Husband, and command you. Drive me not to Extremities, I conjure you, for the fake of both of us, but hasten to redeem that Character your late Behaviour has but too much forfeited, and restore long absent Peace and Happiness to Your passionately Tender and ever Faithful Husband,
ADRASTUS 
P. S. One thing I had forgot, use me well in the Person of my Friend, provide an Apartment near you, if you have not room for him in your own he is entirely a Stranger mCaramania, and has no other Business there, than to oblige me in conducting you. Once more, my dearest ISMONDA, for a short time, Adieu. 
  Had a sudden peal of Thunder cleft the' Palace Roof, and threaten'd all beneath. with instant Death, scarce could it have struck more terror into the guilty Soul of this Fair Criminal, than did the reading this Letter inflict on her.—She saw the Patience of her injur'd Lord was now entirely wornout, she was left without Excuse, or almost a possibility of continuing any longer in Caramania, and the thoughts of quitting her dear Prince, was something so terrible, that nothing is more strange, than that she had presence enough of Mind to restrain the bursting Grief from showing itself in her Countenance in the presence of this Person, who she easily perceiv'd was sent as a Spy on her Actions. She fore'd herself however to treat him with all imaginable Complaisance, and told him, that in every thing in her power she would testify the Love she bore ADRASTUS and as he had desir'd in his Letter that he might be lodg'd near her, she would order an Apartment for him adjoining to her own But, said she, I know not yet how far I may be able to comply with his Desires of returning to ANATOLIA i the Princess will, I know, exert her Authority to keep me with her, and ADRASTUS is not ignorant what we both owe to the Birth and Virtues of that excellent Ladyi nor the Obligations I in particular have to her, both by Duty and the tenderest Affection, Nor is the just ISMONDA to be told, answer'd he, how far all other Duties and Affections are to yield to those which Marriage makes Nor can my Lord believe that Princess, who is herself fo bright an Example of Conjugal Love, would, on any consideration, occasion a breach of it in others But, I hope, continu'd he, there will be no ncod of Arguments to convince you how highly requisite it is you should return to a Husband to whom you are so dear, and who is resolv'd to be no longer separated from you. All things must give way to Necessity, resum'd she coldly, but, if you please, we will talk further of this Affair iomc other time. The fatigue of so long a Journey requires repose, my Servants shall conduct you to a Chamber, and in the mean time I will acquaint HYANTHE with the Business of your coming. In speaking these Words, she rang for her Attendants two of the Grooms .of her Chamber immediately entering, she commanded them to show the Stranger t? the best of those Apartments she could call her own and, as she had said, went directly the Princess, and communicated to her the whole Affair, telling her that nothing could be so actlicting to her, as the Thoughts of quitting her Service, and en. treating, she would permit her stay and that she might not be fore'dfrom her, to intercede with the Prince for some Post of Honour which might engage ADRASTUS to come also, and live with her in Caramania. The Princess paus'd some time before she made any Answer to this Requests and after she had, as she thought, justly weigh'd the Reasons of the other, I can never, said She, too gratefully acknowledge the Obligations I have to your Friendship, in preferring my Service to the Society of so tender a Husband as is ADRAStUs I have many times reflected on so unexampled a Proof of your Regard for me, with all the Admirations it merits but notwithstanding all this, my dear ISMONDA! the censorious World is of another Opinion in spite of all the Arguments I can bring in your Vindication, they will ascribe your stay in Caramania, to other Motives than your Friendship for me. In fine, I need not repeat the unwelcome Name, ARIDANOR has the glory of inspiring you with Inclinations to the prejudice of ADRASTUS, nor do I fee how it will be at all consistent with that Same all Women of Virtue ought to endeavour to preserve, if you tarry longer from the Arms of that indulgent, yet impatient Husband. Cou'd he, indeed, be prevail'd on to live among us, your Reputation, as well as his Desires, would be sceur'd, and Friendship no longer be at variance with Duty, Oh it remains in you, my Gracious Princess! reply d ISMO. pA, tp reconcile these seeming Opposites—were half the Honours he enjoys in Anatolia, offer'd him in Caramania, I know he gladly would accept the Change Influence therefore, I once more conjure you, the Royal THEODORE to make this Tryal of him which if he should refuse, I shall have good cause to doubt his Love, not he to question mine. Well, said HYANTHE, to prove how unwilling I am to lose you but for your own Honour's fake, I will do as you desire, nor do I doubt to gain the Prince to equal all the Dignities your Husband is possess'd of through my Father's Favour—but I foresee the Proffer will be ineffectual, he will make the same Objection against leaving the Service of his Royal Master, as you have show'd Reluctance to quit a Mistress' however, nothing on my part
shall be lest undone. ISMONDA had no time to answer this Condescension, any otherwise than by a low Reverence some Ladies coming in, broke off the Conversation, and ISMONDA disengaging herself as soon as possible, went to seek the Prince, to relate what had pass'd, and prepare him for the Request HYANTHE had promis'd her to make him.
  Nothing cou'd be more transporting to THEODORE than this new Proof of her Affection He prais'd hep Love and Wit in terms proportionable to the Idea he had of fhem, and told her, that as her Tenderness R  had had never yet fail'd to supply her with some pretence or other for an opportunity of iuffering him to indulge his Passion he doubted not but Fate would at last be kind, and by some unexpected Event, consent to bless their mutual Ardor, and lave her the pains of farther Invention. Neither of them imagin'd ADRASTUS would quit his Interest in ANATOLIA, even tho the Prince of Caramania should offer him the half of his Dominions. The time therefore that ISMONDA could hope to gain by this Stratagem, was no longer than it would take up to lend a Messenger to him, and receive an Answer from him she then doubted not but she should a second time be remanded back, and 'twas probable, with greater absoluteness than before, and even in the mean time, must be oblig'd to preserve a much greater caution in her Behaviour than before the coming of this Spy she had occasion to do. The Prince therefore visited her not at home, and they were fore'd to enjoy the Society of each other in a more stolen and less frequent manner than ever, which gave Pains to both of them, which only a Lover equally restrain'd, equally impatient, can be capable of conceiving. 
  CLEARCHUS, for thai was the Name of the Person commistion'd by ADRASTUS, was for some time kept in play by the Subtilty of ISMONDA, being every day told by that Lady, that all she did was for the advantage of her Husband, as well as her own Satisfaction, which she confess'd she could more perfectly enjoy in Caramania, than in Anatolia, tho' it were the place of her Nativity because the Friendship she had for the Princess would not suffer her to part from her, if there were a possibility of avoiding it, without incurring the Displeasure of ADRASTUS. Of how much force these kind of Discourses were on the Person to whom they were made, the Reader will, in a little time, be sensible he made a show, however, of acquiescing to all she said and she had no reason but to believe he was as much deceived by them as she could wish.
  Thus did some Weeks pass over, till the amorous THEODORE, no longer able to live without a nearer Conversation with his beloved ISMONDA, than what a publick view afforded him, made an Appointment with her to pass some part of the Night in the Palace Garden which she, no less impatient and passionate than himself, consented to, well pleas'd. He feign'd himself a little indispos'd, and said he would lie on his own side, ordering the Captain of his Guard to suffer none to enter into his Apartment, till he received permission from himself. ISMONDA, who, since the arrival, CLEARCHUS had never supp'd from him, made an excuse for doing it now, by telling him, that on the account of the Prince's absence, she was obliged to stay with the Princess till she fell asleep, and. perhaps should not return to her Apartment till it was very late. Both of
 

them having thus managed the Affair, came by back ways, unperceiv'd, as they imagin'd, by any Person, to the Rendezvous But scarce had one fond Embrace proclaim'd the Joy which this meeting infused into the Souls of both, before a Voice, well-known to ISMONDA, cry'd out, At length art thou detected, thou vile Adulteress! thy Perjuries, thy Deceits at last laid open! A rustling thro' the Leaves accompany'd these Words, which prov'd the Person who spoke them was making his way as fast as he could to take other Revenge on those he had surpriz'd, than this Interruption could inflict but being in a Walk on the backside of that Arbor which the Lovers had made choice of, he found it impossible to reach them that way, and was coming round to meet them the other, when ISMONDA, who, even in this the greatest Exigence she had ever experienced, or that any Woman could be in, still retain'd her usual presence of Mind, prevented the Prince from drawing his Sword, as he was about to do, by saying in a low Voice, Think not of Revenge or Vindication, the only way for both of us to secure our Loves and Reputations, is to fly. It is my Husband whom I hear.— ADRASTUS! cry d the 'Prince The same, resumed she i make to the Palace with all speed. Never was Confusion equal to that of THEODORE , scarce could he move, much less have the power of Thought what was best for him to do, till animated by her Words and Example, he follow'd her in the Path she took, which being a short Cut to the back Gate, by which she had enter'd, they soon approach'd it when he turning to her, to ask how she would proceed, Take no care for me, my dearest Prince, said she, but go to your Apartment  I will hasten to that of the Princess, and perhaps order it so, that this may be of advantage to our Love, rather than the contrary. She stay'd not for any Answer, but ran directly to HYANTHE'S, and THEODORE pass'd forward to his own, in a Disorder and Perturbation of Spirit, which cannot be express'd. The Princess was in bed when ISMONDA came into the Anti-chamber but some of her Ladies being there, she made an excuse, that she had design'd to sit by the Princess but since she had no need of her attendance, she would stay a while with them. One of them was employ'd in reading to the others a diverting Book, just then publish'd by some modern Wit but yhat attention ISMONDA gave to it, may easily be guess'd. This was, however, a good Opportunity for her to indulge Reflection, and give a little loose to the Amazement she was in. She thought herself perfectly certain, that it was the Voice of ADRASTUS she had heard, but how he had been concealed in Caramania, she could not imagine if it were really him, and that he had follow'd her to the Garden, as she could not well doubt of both, she consider'd that there was no Relief, but an absolute Denial. She had carefully Jook'd round about, when she enter'd the Arbor, and was sure there was none near at that time therefore it must be only Conjecture in him, that she was the Person whom he had surprized. She endeavour'd therefore all she could to overcome every thing that might denote Fear, which she believ'd was all that would make her appear guilty. In these Cogitations, we must quit her, to fee what became of the Person who had occasion' d them.
 ADRASTUS, for it was, indeed, no other, having, with much difficulty, at last prevailed on the King of Anatolia to permit him to go in search of his Wife, too justly fearing there were Motives far different from those she pretended for her stay, accompany'd CLEARCHUS to Caramania, and being disguis'd in the Habit of a Servant, was entertaind as one belonging to the Family of ISMONDA, where he had the opportunity of observing and knowing much more than ever would have reach'd his Ears had he appear'd as himself. 
Among that sort of Conversation in which he was now engaged, there is infinitely more to be learn'd than in any other they talk without reserve of the Foibles of their Superiors, and being frequently oblig'd to be trusted, make no scruple of exchanging one Secret for another. ADRASTUS soon perceiv'd the Genius of his new Acquaintance, and by relating to them some fictitious Adventures of his pretended Master, got from AR ANTE and the rest of them all that they knew of the real ones of their Mistress from that Wench he heard the Story which had so much occasion'd the Laughter of the Court, concerning the Captivity of ARIDANOR in the Closet of ISMONDA, and every body being possess'd with an Opinion of an Intrigue between them, a thousand little Circumstances, all Invention, were added to the Truth, and left him no room to hope but that she was really as guilty with him as was reported. Resolving, however, to be more affur'd before he discover' d himself, he watch'd her every motion, but till that night, had never seen any thing which could be call'd a proof of what he fear'd but being told by CLEARCHUS that she had excused Supping at home on account of the Princess, he was determin'd to know if in that she was sincere or not. As he was on the scout in one of the darkest and most retired Avenues of the Palace, he saw a Person muffled up in his Cloak pass hastily by him, and go into the Garden, and soon after ISMONDA hurry along the same way Never was a Heart more rack'd than that of this unhappy Gentleman s the fears he had, that he should be ascertain' d of what he had yet but suspected, were more terrible to him than the suspense had been, and much ado had he to prevent himself from calling to her as she went, and saying to her, Come back ISMONDA, let not Detection prove me the Wretch I dread to be Come back, and suffer me to retain the thought, that there is a possibility thoil art not false Tis probable, indeed, that had she not pass'd too quick to suffer her to take notice of any thing, some Word or Motion, in spite of him, had difeover'd the Emotions of his Soul, and awaken'd Observation to inspect into the Cause. Seeing her enter the Garden, where but the moment before he had seen the Person, whom he mistook for ARIDANOR, but was indeed the Prince, had gone, he mitde no doubt but that it was an Assignation. The different Passions with which he was agitated at but the supposition of the Injury he was about to suffer, render'd him unable immediately to assure himself but rouzing, as much as possible, from that Lethargy of Thought he had been in, he also push'd back the Wicket, and went into the Garden but there being two Walks which met at that Entrance, he Was uncertain which it was, they, whom he sought, had took and happening to make choice of the wrong, could neither fee nor hear any thing of them till he came to that Arbor, where being no Passage on the side he was, he but vainly endeavour'd to get through, when he cry'd out to them in the manner already mention'd, and occasion'd their flight. The way being twice as long from where he was to the Arbor, as it was from it to the Palace, they had time to settle themselves, as I .have represented, before he could arrive at the place where he first perceiv'd they were. .He spent some hours, after he found they were gone, in giving vent to the Distraction he was in, at this plain Demonstration of his Misfortune. Vex'd he was that he had discover' d himself, since he had been prevented from appearing in the manner he had design'd to do, and it was now too late for him to resume his disguise, not doubting but that ISMONDA had known his Voice.
He wish'd he had remain'd yet a little longer time conceal'd, but then reflecting that he already had seen enough, and needed no more to be convinc'd of the Infidelity of that that fair Hypocrite, he ceas'd to be uneasy at the Interruption he had given, and bent his whole Thoughts on Revenge, and the manner in which he would accomplish it At his return to the Palace, he went to the Chamber of CLEARCHUS, where beins inform'd she was not yet come home, he dress'd himself in one of those Habits he had been accustom'd to wear when he was call'd ADRASTUS, and as soon as he was ready, sent a Page to search for her, who having heard her say she was going to HYANTHE, went no farther than the Apartment of that Princess, and having acquainted her with his Message, and from whom he receiv'd it, she summon'd all the Courage she was Mistress of to arm her for this Encounter and having prepar'd herself beyond Imagination, she flew to the Room where she was told he was, and preventing his approach to her, threw her Arms about his Neck, crying, My dear ADRASTUS, by what Miracle is it that I behold you here? Has my good Angel whisper'd in your Ear the good I am about to do for you, and you thus kindly come and spare me the pains of sending? Yes, Madam, answer d he, disengaging himself as soon as possible from her Careless, and turning from her with a Countenance which denoted the mingled Rage and Grief of his tormented Soul, I am too well satisfy'd what it is you do for me and after the knowledge that you have been false, nothing could so much astonish me, as that there is a possibility for Vice, like yours, to wear the shape of Virtue Good Heaven, pursu'd he wildly, why do you surfer that Face still to retain its show of Innocence? Why is not her Form grown black and horrid, like her polluted Soul? some publick mark of Infamy should appear to warn unwary Gazers from her destructive Charms. Oh all ye Gods of Caramania, interrupted she, and offering to take his Hand, what sudden Frenzy has possess'd my Lord? Off thou Adulteress, resum'd he, throwing her from him, well may'st thou call on foreign Deities, thy own have long since forsaken thee when for the Embraces of a Stranger, the curs'd ARIDANOR, thou did'st refuse those of a once fond doating Husband.———Shame, and the worst of Crimes has been thy Choice, and Hell and Horrour shall reward thee for it. Not all the Terror which conscious Guilt had before involv'd her in, was equal to the Joy she now conceiv'd at his mistake. Innocent of this Accusation, she threw off the supplicating Air she had put on, and assuming one all haughtiness, Unjust ADRASTUS, said she, is it thus that you return the Obligations you have to me? Am I, for having prescrv'd my Honour inviolable from all the Artifices, nay, combated even with the Force of that seducing Lord, to be reproached Injurious Man, never will I forgive the wrong thou hast done me, nor, should'st thou repent of what thou hast said in Rivers of incessant Tears, any more will know thee by the Name of Husband, or share the Bed of one who has so much profaned my Virtue. Scarce could he contain himself in hearing her speak in this manner, from expressing his Rage in something more violent than Words. More than once he laid his Hand upon his Sword, but CLEARCHUS restrain'd him from going farther— O more than Impudence, cry'd he, stamping and walking about the Room in a disorder d motion Language has no Name to distinguish this Behaviour, which would not wrong the monstrous Meaning had not my own Eyes and Ears betray'd the horrid Secret, I know not but in spite of all I have been told, my foolish Heart would yet have doubted if she had been base. But to give the lye to all my Senses, nay, when her own have inform'd her that they have been Witness of her Crime, is something which sure she could not have learn'd in any School but that of Hell. Were not your perfidious Arms, continu'd he, turning to her, close lock'd about the Adulterer's Neck? Did not short Sighs and mingling Kisses proclaim a mutual eagerness for the guilty Joy, when my abus'd Patience, no longer able to endure the shocking Scenes made me break out, and vainly struggle for a Passage to reach the hated Heart of your Undoer? All a Madman's Dream, reply'd she scornfully When or where was I so kind? Can you deny it? said he Was it not now, this very Night, in the Palace Garden?—Oh! had you not both been too well acquainted with the Place, my Rage had overtaken your flight, and put you past the power of urging me yet more by so obstinate a Contradiction but it is not yet too late, added he, and such Examples will I make. Compose yourself to sleep, resum'd she, and tomorrow I will talk with you before those who are better judges of my Conduct. In speaking this, she flung out of the Room, CLEARCHUS preventing him from detaining her, and half persuaded of her Innocence, with so much Serenity and unshaken Temper had she behav'd Are you certain, my Lord! said he to him, that you have not been deceiv'd? to me, Appearances on her fide stand fair she told me she was going to the Apartment of the Princess, and it was there, when sent for, she was found With what probability then could it be she whom you saw in the PalaceGarden? you might probably be deceiv'd by the faint glimmerings of the uncertain Moon, and having the Image of ISMONDA ever present to your Eyes, might, .with ease, mistake some other for her. This Suggestion of CLEARCHUS made him perfectly outrageous what, said be, do my very Friends conspire against me, and take the Wanton's part?—How could I be deceiv'd, when free from Passion, and scarce believing my Misfortune, she pass'd so close to the place in which I stood, a little nearer and she had discover'd me? it was not by the Moon's faint light I saw her then, but by the unerring Lamps which fill the Palace Gallery. He added many more Circumstances, which but too plainly prov'd he could not have been mistaken, and after passing the remainder of the night in Discourses suitable to the Occasion, he wrote a little Note to ARIDANOR, which he oblig'd CLEARCHUS to carry to him, the Contents whereof were as follows.
  To ARIDANOR. 
AS you are conscious of having injur'd me, so are you also sensible what kind of Reparation is expected from a Man of Honour As I am too much a Stranger in Caramania to know what place is most proper for such an Interview, I leave it to your appointment, as also whether with or without Seconds tho since the quarrel concerns none but ourselves, I think it needless to interest any other in it however, if you are of a different Opinion, I am not unprovided of a Friend, please to let me know your Resolution by the Bearer, and also where about an hour hence I may hope to find you. Tho a Stranger to my Person, I believe you have heard too much of my Character to think me unworthy of your Sword, when I shall inform you I am call'd Adrastus. 
  Loth was CLEARCHUS to be the Bearer of this Mandate, yet as the Affair seem'd to be, could offer nothing in opposition to it he therefore went about the execution of his Commission, but found some difficulty in being introduced to the presence of ARIDANOR, who was not yet risen however, on telling the Servant that his Business was of a nature which would not brook delay, he was admitted. He deliver'd the Billet to him while he was in Bed, and having read it, heard him call for Pen and Paper immediately, and in a small time receiv'd an Answer from his own Hand which returning with to ADRASTUS, he communicated to him it contain'd these Words.
  To ADRASTUS. Tho I am as much a Stranger to the Guilt of which you seem to accuse me, as I am to your Person, and cannot imagine by what means I should possibly S  'have have injur'd one so much a Stranger, yet am I ready to give you what Satisfaction you shall think proper which, that you may the better judge, I will meet you in the Wilderness, behind the Palace Garden, within this Hour at furthest am of your mind, that there is no occasion for Witnesses of what we have to say, and shall therefore come alone.
ARIDANOR. 
  He has answer'd like a Man of Honour, nor could any other, said ADRASTUS, with a Sigh, have deprived me of the Affections of ISMONDA he pass'd some little time iri Discourses of the same nature, after which heembrae'd CLEARCHUS, and went to the place appointed, where he had not walk'd above the Space of a minute, before he saw ARIDANOR approach , he had the advantage as having seen him while he remain'd with CLEARCHUS in disguise, but ARIDANOR who knew him not, was at a loss whether he was his Antagonist or not, till plucking off his Hat and approaching him, You are punctual, my Lord! said he, nor did I expect other from your Character the Man who dares commit an Injury, should also dare as boldly to defend it. Yes, ADRASTUS, reply'd ARIDANOR, nor is it that I fear your Sword that I desire some Speech before we engage, but because those Actions cannot not, with justice, be call'd brave, to which we are only instigated by our Passions, I should be glad to know the Reason why we are Enemies. Oh ye Gods! cry'd the other, transported with Rage, is that a Question for ARIDANOR to ask the Husband of Ismonda Can he believe me ignorant of the wrong he has done me?— Or does he insult the Shame he has brought on me, and would make me the Reporter of my own Infamy? ADRASTUS, resum'd he, I have not wrong'd you—but since you have nam'd ISMONDA, I am no longer at a loss to guess the Cause of your too justifiable, tho mistaken Rage O! continu'd he, after a pause, that you knew me better, that you might not think 'twas Cowardice prompted my Tongue, I would reveal a Secret. Speak it, interrupted ADRASTUS, your Same in Battle has been too well establish to suffer such a Thought—if there be aught concerning my Dishonour more than yet I know, be generous and tell me. You yet know nothing, reply d ARIDANOR, but are abus'd by false Intelligence, but longer shall you not  have consider'd, and find 'twould be mere Madness, and not Bravery, to suffer you to continue in a Mistake which might not only be fatal to one or both of us, but also add new Triumphs, and full Security to the fair false ISMONDA, and her great Seducer for should you fall by me, or I by you, the Death of either would be welcome Ti dings by mine, they would be rid of, perhaps, the only Person who has it in his power to betray their Secret and by yours, the fears of Separation would no more disturb the guilty Pair.
  I will not therefore fight with thee, ADRASTUS, on this Theme, at least not till you have heard the Truth. O speak it, cry'd the distracted Husband I my Soul is all Astonishment if I have been deceives, and wrong'd your Virtue, I will entreat your Pardon in the humblest manner. Calm the tempestuous Passions of your Grief, if possible, resutrid ARIDANOR you have not wrong'd me, neither am I guilty I am, and am not innocent well may you seem amazed, but soon will I explain the Mystery. Know then, ISMONDA scorns to sin beneath a Prince and had there not been a THEODORE, ADRASTUS would have had no room for suspicion of ARIDANOR. Here the impatient Soul of this afflicted Man was able to contain no longer but casting a furious Look, and lifting up his Hands, as tho' he would accuse Heaven of his Misfortune, Gods! cry'd he, can it be possible? The Prince!—the Husband of HYANTHE attempt the Honour of her. Friend, her Boibm Favourite! But tell me, continued he, turning his Eyes on ARIDANOR, inform me, generous Lord, the whole of this vile Secret let me not linger in a Life of Torment, but kill me at once with assuring me 'tis so. I wish that I could say there was a hope it were not, resumed the other  but because it would be mean-soul'd in me to reveal the Crimes of others, while I conceal my own, I will confess, that when the knowledge of the Prince's Happiness made bold my hopes, I too presumed to talk to her of Love but with such force did she repel my Suit, that soon I dropp'd the fruitless Prosecution. Yet one thing more I have to ask, said ADRASTUS, and I conjure you, by your Honour, hide not the Truth Were you not late last Night in the Gardens of the Palace? No, by Heaven, answered ARIDANOR but as I cross'd the Gallery, I saw your royal Rival close muffled in his Cloak, and unattended, pass that way. Twas him then I mistook for you, cry'd the tormented ADRASTUS Oh that my Sword unknowing him had reach'd his Heart! Oh that I were still in ignorance by whom I am abus'd! some lucky Moment might then have thrown me on him, and I might have taken that just Revenge on the Destroyer of my Honour, which now the Name of THEODORE debars me from were it any other than the Husband of HYHYANTHE, tho' guarded by the brightest of the celestial Beings, he should not 'scape my Rage. Damnation! pursued he, all other Curses of the offended Gods, are mean to bearing Injuries as I must do.
  A considerable time was pass'd between the one, relating all he knew of this Adventure  and the other, in exclaiming on the Severity of his Fate, and the Falsehood of ISMONDA After which they parted, and ADRAStiTs return'd to the Apartment of his Wife, who he found abroad she was gone to the Princess, to acquaint her with the arrival of ADRASTUS, and his unjust Suspicions of her. He had scarce finished the account he was giving to CLEARCHUS, of what had pass'd between him and ARIDANOR, when one of the Princess's Pages came to let him know she expected to see him having been inform'd his Wife was already with her, he doubted not but she had madp her Complaint to that deceiv'd Lady, and was in a Perplexity which cannot be describ'd, in what manner he should defend his Accusations against her, without, at the same time, proclaiming the Guilt of the Prince which not only the Admonitions of CLEARCHUS, but his own Reason also persuaded him it was wholly improper to do. The Affair was nice, and in the present Confusion of his Thoughts, he found himself incapable of managing it yet was there an absolute Necessity of obeying the Summons of a Princess, who was the Daughter of his Master. He therefore compos'd himself as much as possible to attend her. He found her in her Closet entirely alone, ISMONDA having entreated not to be present during this Conversation. How comes it, ADRASTUS, said she, as soon as he approached, that you have conceal'd yourself in Caramania? I thought the Love and Duty you pay my royal Father, had extended to all belonging to him, and that the first Visit you had made, had been to me. Pardon, bright Princess! answer'd he, this seeming neglect Of that Regard due to your high Birth, and more illustrious Virtues but there were Reasons for the Concealment of my Arrival, which could not be dispensed with, and which have made me guilty of Omissions both to Heaven and you. I fear those Reasons, said HYANTHE, are such as cannot be approv'd by the Well-wishers of your Same, or Peace of Mind I hear, and grieve to hear, strange Stories of your alter'd Humour. Believe me, ADRASTUS, Jealousy is the worst Passion Of the Soul, and when 'tis causeless, is an Offence to Virtue scarcely pardonable. I am of the same opinion, Madam, answer'd he and because I would not give it entrance, endeavour'd to arrive at certainty.—And how far have you succeeded? interrupted the Princess. 
  Now was this unhappy Husband in the utmost Dilemma, in what manner to reply but a sudden Thought coming that moment into his head, after a moment's Pause So far, Madam, answer'd he, as has serv'd to convince me that I have been deceiv'd by false Reports, and have injur'd by an unjust Suspicion ARIDANOR. He was going to say his Wife, but could not force his Tongue so much to belye his Heart. And not ISMONDA too I demanded the 'Princess. When she returns to Anatolia, resumed he, what my opinion is of her, will show itself.—I therefore beseech your Highness, continued he, putting one Knee to the Ground, that you will no longer countenance her stay, nor suffer her to skreen under your sacred Umbrage the little Regard she has testify'd to my Desires. Far be it from me, res If d she, who am myself a Wife, to go about to hinder one who is a Wife from that Obedience the Name of Husband claims but as I would not have her wanting in her Duty, so I hope you will remember there is also some required from you, and not by harsh Treatment, or too great an Exertion of your Authority oblige her to repent she ever put it in your power. Here the Memory of the former Tenderness he had expressed to her, and her Ingratitude imee, made him shake with inward Agony. How I have behav'd, Madam, said he, yourself has been a Witness. In what manner I shall behave, will be owing to her Actions. I comprehend not the meaning of these mysterious Words, reply'd the 'Princess, who was entirely prepossess d by what that subtle Woman had said to her you seem to have still a reserve of Indignation in your Soul, which may make her fear the Usage I have mention'd And as her Friendship for me has been her only Crime, it lies on me to engage her Par doni which you must give, ADRASTUS, pursued she smiling, or I shall think you look on me as a Rival. I neither can, nor ought, answered he, to refuse any thing to the Daughter of my Sovereign, and a Princess illustrious for a thousand Virtues, but most for her heavenly Sweetness of Disposition and while ISMONDA has had so bright a Pattern, methinks it is impossible she should have err'd.—— I insist therefore on no more than that she prepare with all expedition to depart with me for Anatolia.  
  The Princess, well pleased with thinking she had brought about this Reconciliation, endeavour'd to persuade him to continue with them in Caramania, assuring him that the Prince her Husband would put him into Posts of Honour equivalent to those he enjoy'd in Anatolia. But before his Tongue could bring forth a refusal of this Offer, his Looks demonstrated how unwelcome it was to him. At the Name of THEODORE, scarce could he refrain from uttering all he knew, and the Reasons that Prince had for engaging his stay but the regard he had for the Quiet of the happily deceived HYANTHE, prevented him and he only excused himself from accepting any Favours offer'd him by her Husband, on the account of those he had received from her Father, whose Service, while he could be of any use to him, Gratitude he said would not permit him to leave. Though the Princess, truly loving ISMONDA, urg'd him as strenuously as the Cafe would permit, yet could she alledge but little, besides her own Desires, against the Justice of those Arguments he made use of to back his Denial, and she was oblig'd at last to own that he was in the right, and consent to discharge ISMONDA from her Service.
  ADRASTUS had no sooner disengaged himself from the Princess, than he return'd to the Apartment of his Wife, where he communicated to CLEARCHUS every particular of the Conversation which had pass'd between him and HYANTHE but when he came to that which related the promise of his Pardon to ISMONDA, and his design of taking her with him to Anatolia, nothing could be more amaz'd, than was his Friend And can you then, said he, interrupting him, so readily forgive what but some hours since you swore, that to the last Moments of your Life, you would endeavour to revenge? Does the Name of Prince so far alleviate the Guilt, that you can consent to live again with the false fair ISMONDA? A gloomy Smile at this Interrogation diffused itself around the Mouth of this offended Husband No, CLEARCHUS! resumed he, think not so meanly of ADRASTUS, 'tis to accomplish that Revenge, at which I can arrive no other way, that I affect this Patience, this tame forgiving Nature. Should I leave her in Caramania, what more could the adulterous Pair desire? But I will divide them divide them for ever give them to know some part of the Hells they have on me inflicted and to prevent a second Injury of this kind from any other Man, soon as she arrives in Anatolia, shall she be immur'd among the Vestals. The Surprize which CLEARCHUS had at first conceiv'd, was now succeeded by an adequate Admiration he applauded his Conduct, and encouraged him in this Resolution, with all the Eloquence he was master of.
  While they were talking, ISMONDA, who by the Princess had been inform'd of what he said, came in and with art Air of Haughtiness, with which she, but in vain, endeavour'd to mingle a little Sweetness Now, my Lord, said she, I hope you are convinced of the Injury your mistaken Rage has done me, and are prepar'd to ask my pardon. We will talk no more, Madam, reply'd he, either of Injuries or Pardon, it will be time enough when we come to Anatolia and the greater speed you make in getting ready for this Journey, the more I shall be inclinable to think you wish a more perfect Reconciliation between us, than can be made in Caramania. I know not, said she, whether I shall accept it on those terms, or not. And with these Words left the Room, refusing to hold any further Conversation with him, tho' he call'd after her to assure her he would afford it on no other, nor would consent to bed with her, or call her by the name of Wife, while she continued in Caramania. 
  Nor did he stagger in this Resolution, but went with CLEARCHUS immediately out of the Palace, and took private Lodgings at some distance from it. Nothing certainly ever equal'd the Perplexity of ISMONDA at this sudden turn of her Fate, unless ir were that in which her belov'd THEODORE was involv'd. Neither of them could now invent the least plausible Pretext, ADRASTUS had refus'd all Offices which might detain him in Caramania the Princess had given her Consent that ISMONDA should depart, and there appear'd no way of preventing this Misfortune to their Love, but such as must have open'd the Eyes not only of the Princess, but the whole Nation also, to sec into the long bid Secret. MARMILLIO was now a Person whose Presence and Advice was thought exceeding necessary, and the Prince was beginning to think by what means he should recall him, without the Eclat of his restoration into Favour being prejudicial to himself when CLEOMENES acquainted him, that his Brother having receiv'd News that IRENE had died in Childbirth, desired nothing more than his Highness's Permission to return.
 This was welcome News to THEODORE, he sent an immediate dispatch that he should come with all possible expedition, giving out among his Courtiers, that as that Favourite had incurr'd his displeasure only for a rash Word, he thought he had sufficiently punish'd him for so trivial a Fault. Nor did this Alteration impede his Desires of seeing EURIDICE the Bride of DORASPE, but on the contrary, it very much forwarded that Marriage for ARBANES, by the return of MARMILLIO, being frustrated of the Expectations with which he had flatter'd himself of being the chief Favourite of his Sovereign, and receiving the consequential Benefits of such a Trust, thought it best not to neglect that only means which now remain'd of advancing his Family, by an Alliance with one so powerful as that of Doraspe and since Death had disappointed his Son ERNESTUS of his hope of IRENE, he was resolv'd for the future, never to leave any thing to Time or Chance, and hurry'd the flow EURIDICE to Nuptials, which in her Soul were little less detestable to her than the Grave.
  MARMILLIO had many Friends who truly lov'd him, and sincerely rejoie'd at his Reestablishment but theirs was a Joy faint and languid, when compar'd with that which fill'd the Soul of the transported ARILLA. The News of it no sooner reach'd her Ears, than she again indulg'd the pleasing Idea of rewarded Passion again prepar'd to meet the Joys of Love and her heav'd Bosom swell'd with renew'd Desires but alas! little did the false Man merit so true a Passion Far different from her Expectations, were the Caresses with which he now receiv'd her Ardors! Absence had quite estrang'd his fickle Heart, and a new Object obliterated almost the Memory of the former.
  While depriv'd of the Pleasures of the Court, he cou'd not live without his Amusements being invited after a Hunting Match, to the House of a wealthy Commoner in that part of the Country which he had chose for his Retirement, he became so miich enaraour'd of the fair CARICLEA, the Wife of that Gentleman to whom he was a Guest, that the Idea of ARILLA, to whom he had been so much devoted, soon lost all the Empire over his Soul. Perfectly skill'din the undoing Art, he exerted all for the obtaining this new Conquest, and the unwary Listner, too weakly guarded, became a Prey to his destructive Insinuations, The unsuspecting Husband, far from guesting at the Motive which occasion'd the frequent Visits he now receiv'd from him, took them as so many Prooss of his Friendship, and was transported at the deference paid him by a Man of MARMILLIO 'S Quality, from all the other Gentlemen of the County. He had a young Sister equally lovely with CARICLEA, tho' of another sort of Beautythis blooming Creature, when MARMILLIO found himself recall'd to Court, he persuaded to go with him, telling her, he would introduce her to the Service of the Princess, which would not only improve her in Conversation, but also throw her in the way of Fortune there was no doubt, he said, but Charms such as hers would appear, when set forth to advantage, might make up for the deficiencies of Birth, and entitle her to a Husband among the first Rank of the Nobility. CARICLEA seem'd of the same Opinion, and infusing some T z PrinPrinciples of Ambition into the Mind of the young Girl, made her continually teaze her Brother for his Consent which he at last gave, on Condition his Wife would accompany her, and fee her settled with the Princess before she left her. This was all that the guilty Pair defir'd MARMILLIO not yet grown weary of the Charms of CARICLEA, and divided between his Love Interest, had form'd this Stratagem for the Gratification of both and the Fair Transgressor was infinitely pleas'd, to think how freely she might indulge her Passion when absent from her Husband, who, by reason of a publick Office he bore in the Country, cou'd not leave it.
  Depending therefore on the Virtue of his Wife, he gave his Sister wholly to her Care as to her Behaviour, and recommending her Preferment to MARMILLIO, who had promis'd such great Things, suffer'd them to take leave without the least suspicion of what they design'd, or that the innocent Maid was the Property which they made use of for no other purpose than his Dishonour.
  For some time after they came to Court, CARICLEA maintain'd her Empire over the Heart of him who had brought her to it and when it decreas'd, ARILLA profited not by the Change nothing being more true than that Saying of an English Poet, 
  To Love once fast we cannot backward 
move Call Tester day again, and I may love. 
  Few Men, if ever any were, are twice enamour'd of the same Object their whole Life indeed is oae continued Series of Change, but then it is still to new Desires the Heart that is once estrang'd, is never to be recall'd and though the forsaken Nymph is sure to have her present Rival in the same Condition with herself, yet must she not hope to reap any other Advantage, than Revenge. ARILLA soon perceiv'd she owed her Misfortune to the Beauties of CARICLEA, and had Wit enough to know that Complaints would be of little service to establish her in the Affections of this ungrateful Man. Unable therefore to endure the fight Of what was so distracting to her, she quitted the Service of the Princess, and retired to the House of a Relation in the Country, with a Resolution never to return, unless her Reason could so far get the better of her Passion, as to give her Courage to look on all he did with the Eyes of Indifference and Contempt.
  Her removal made room for VIOLETTA, so was the Sister of the Husband of CARICLEA called And MARMILLIO, as much to leave that Lady whose absence he now began to wish, as much as he had done her presence no pretence of staying, as to comply with the Promise he had made her Husband, neglected not this opportunity of introducing this young Beauty. There were no Obstacles to her reception, she was well accomplish'd, and of a Family inferiour to none, who were not of the Nobility. HYANTHE accepted her with her usual Affability and Sweetness, and assured CARICLEA, who accompany'd her to the Presence Chamber, that there were none among her Train of noble Maids, whom she WOilldtrear with greater Kindness.
  VIOLETTA thus fix'd at Court, CARICLEA 'was oblig'd to return home, and sav'd herself the Grief of being forsaken The necessity of her Departure engaging Marmillio to entertain her with the appearance of the same Ardours, as those with which he first seduced her easy Heart and she parted with this Satisfaction in her mind, that she left him involved in equal Sorrow, and that his Inclinations would hiring him in a short time to visit her.
  Next to the fear'd IREUE, nothing had ever given him more Pleasure, than to be freed from ARILLA, and this last Conquest of his victorious Wiles he was now at liberty to prosecute a new Design, which everwaving Passion had fbrm'd against the the Virtue of OLIMPIA, a young Lady of exquisite Beauty and Accomplishments, but esteem'd a Manhater, and 'tis probable the difficulty that appear'd in gaining her, was no less an inducement to him than any other Charm. He long'd to triumph over so rigid a Virtue He thought it would be an infinite Satisfaction to know himself possess'd of what so many had languish'd for in vain, and resolv'd to leave no means untry'd to bring her into the number of those who were unable to withstand his Sollicitations. Many proposals greatly to the advantage of her Fortune had been made her, yet was she so far from accepting them, that tho' she had, at the first acquaintance with them, declar'd a liking of their Conversation, they no sooner appear'd as Lovers, than she immediately despis'd and us'd them ills and to prevent all further Importunities of the like nature, at last treated the whole Sex with a Contempt which was scarce reconcileable to Good Breeding. MARMILLIO had frequently been in her Company, and had found the Effects of this Humour in common with the rest of Mankind, yet did it not deter him and setting himself to dive into the secret of a Disposition so foreign to all that is natural, he thought it must proceed either from a secret Passion she had entertain'd for some one Man, that had created in her an aversion to all others or else, that it was no more than Affectation, and that she imagin'd by seeming to Hate, she might give the greater loose to Love, unperceiv'd and unsuspected. His Business therefore, was to find out which of these two Motives was the right i but by what means he should make this Discovery, he was for some time at a loss and was indeed at last indebted for it only to an Accident as whimsical in effect, as it was ruinous to the Honour and future Reputation of this seemingly reserv'd Lady.
  Happening to pass by her House one Night when it was very late, he saw the Door wide open, and no Servant near it, nor any Light appearing at the Windows, he presently imagin'd it might have been broken open by Thieves and having two Men with him, he made them go into the Hall, and call to the Footmen, but none answering for a long time, he grew convinc'd that his Conjectures had been true, and made yet a louder Noise. At length a Fellow came running down stairs half naked, and with all the marks of fright and astonishment on his Face, Are any of the Family beside your self,said MARMILLIO, awake? No, my Lord, answer d he. Your Lady then, resum'd he, is doubtless robb'd And then told him in what manner he had seen the Door, and the occasion of his coming in at that unseasonable hour. On which, the Fellow ran up stairs to call his Companions, who being all soundly steeping, were not very easy to be rouz'd from it. All the Men, and Maid-Servants, being at last alarm'd, they went up and down the House with Lights, endeavouring to discover at what place the Rogues had enter'd, or what they had taken away. OLIMPIA'S Woman ran into her Chamber, to apprize her Lady of what had happen'd but not finding her there, stiriek'd out, that the Thieves had stole away her Lady on which, every body going into that Room, they found it stripp'd of all the rich Things in it, which could conveniently be carry'd away her dressing Plate, a fine Watch and Equipage, which, at her going to Bed, were always hung in a Cafe made on purpose for themher Cabinet broken open, and her Jewels and Money taken out. There was indeed sufficient in this Room to glut the Avarice of these nocturnal Pilferers and cither being satisfy'd with their Booty, or fearful of Discovery, they went into no other, as might be suppos'd for every thing stood as it did in all the other Apartments. As MARMILLIO, with the Servants of this Lady, were searching the House, one of them cry'd out, that the Door which open'd into the Garden was unbarr'd on which the rest going toward it, found it was so indeed, and were then no longer at a loss by what means the Rogues had gotten entrance  every one, however, MARMILLIO especially, being in great Concern what was become of OLIMPIA, some of the Footmen ran with lighted Torches into the Garden, where in a close Arbor they found her bound and gagg'd, and, to their great amazement, the ugliest and most dirty of her Grooms in the same posture. Scarce would the wonder which they all were involv'd in, permit them to deliver her from that uneasy State but MARMILLIO, who had more Presence of Mind, was the first who gave her any Assistance, and taking the Gag out of her Mouth, restor'd her to the use of Speech, while the others were busily employ'd in unfastening the Cords which had rudely been twisted round her Legs and Arms. It was expected that she would have related to them, so soon as she had power, how she came to be thus expos'd, but she appear'd in too great a Confusion to do it and when MARMILLIO, having his own secret Reasons for the Question, ask'd her how it came to pass that she chose so odd and so dangerous an hour for walking, she answer'd nothing. And when he more maliciously demanded, if it were with her knowledge that the Groom was in the Garden at the same time her Ladyship had chose to make it the place of her Retirement, she seem’d ready to die with Shame and Vexation and instead of thanking MARMILLIO for the timely assistance he had given her, she flung abruptly from him, crying, I cannot imagine what Accident or Design should bring you here at this time. He endeavour'd not to stay her, nor had any further business to remain there any longer himself, but went thro' the House, and into his Chair, impatient till he was at home, to examine the Contents of a small piece of Paper which he had taken up in the Arbor of OLIMPIA'S Garden, and lay near the Groom and which, 'twas probable, the Thieves in rifling his Pockets had let fall. He had no sooner enter'd his Closet, than opening it, he found it contain'd these Lines. 
   Tho' I have turn'd away the Wench, whose inquisitive Disposition gave me just cause of Fear, yet am I still apprehensive of discovery, by some unlucky Accident or other. We cannot, my dear SILO, be perfectly secure, while we continue our Endearments in my Chamber , I will therefore quit my Bed when  all the Family are drown'd in steep, and 'steal down to the close Arbor at the farther end of the Garden, where I shall expect you with all the Impatience of the most doating Affection. Doating, indeed, cry'd MARMILLIO to himself as soon as he had done reading was ever such monstruous Hypocrisy! 'Tis certain, that tho' he had not that opinion of her Virtue, which the generality of the World had, yet he could never imagine she would have stoop'd so low as her own Groom, if he had not seen the Confirmation of it under her own hand, which he knew perfectly well, having often seen it on several Occasions. He could not forbear laughing, however, when he consider'd on the whimsicalness of this Adventure It was plain, that the Thieves coming over the Wall with a design to rob the House, had found the Mistress of it with her humble Enamorato in that Arbor  and haying bound and gagg'd them, found an easy opportunity to compass their Design. Having a little given way to the Diversion of his Humour on this comical Affair, his more serious Inclinations resumed some part of their former force I say, some part for after the knowledge how much OLIMPIA had demean'd herself, he had not those passionate Desires for her Enjoyment as before. It was Curiosity, and perhaps some mixture of a more base Passion, which made him now resolve not to relinquish his Pretensions, and encourag'd by the discovery he had made, press'd on her in so close a manner, that it oblig'd her to make use of all the Invectives she could muster up against the Sex, to make him desist and perceiving that those Artifices, which had been fatal to so many of the believing Fair, had no influence on her, he grew at last so piqued, that, without any regard to her Quality, or those Vows of an eternal Adoration he had made her, he upbraided her with Hypocrisy and Deceit and to prove that he knew her pretended Virtue all a Cheat, reveal'd to her by what means he had been acquainted with the Condescensions with which she had favour'd SILO, and theaten'd to make the Affair publick to the whole Town, if she consented not to bribe him in the manner he desir'd. Nothing can be imagin'd of Fear, Vexation, and Surprize, superiour to what OLIMPIA endur'd in this shock at first she raged, forswore all he alledged, and branded him with Injustice and Barbarity, in terms the most opprobrious that Passion could suggest but all she said having no other effect, than to make him more resolute to expose her, she fell into as mean Submissions, entreating him to pity the Weakness she had been guilty of, and not ruin her for ever, by revealing what he had discover'd. She told him that SILO, by concealing himself in her Chamber, had at first ravish'd her Virgin Favours, Shame preventing her from alarming the Family because that, while asleep, he had presumed too far for her to suffer to be made publick and that since, more out of fear of being betray'd by his Malice, file had yielded to repeat the guilty Joy, than out of any Pleasure she took in the Caresses of a Wretch so much beneath her and that the Reflection how cruelly her Virtue had been triumph'd over by him, had been the occasion of that Hatred she express'd to all Mankind in general. And can you not, said MARMILLIO, assume Courage enough to throw off such a bold Invader? What matters it, in what manner he shall speak who will believe the Words of a discarded Servant?
A Villain so audacious should rather have met the Punishment of his Crime from your offended Hand, than reap'd Reward.— But you have since forgiven, and no doubt love the Wretch. No, by my hopes of Happiness, resumed she and had I any Friend would rid me of him, should think myself oblig'd past Recompence. But to whom could I apply for such a Favour, without relating the cause of my Disgust you are the first Discoverer of this horrid Secret, and if indeed you lov'd me, would not endure a Rival such as he to be possess'd of the Advantages he is. What can I do, MARMILLIO, to a Creature unworthy of my Sword? O! there are a thousand, said she, who, for a trifling Reward, would send him from the World. AS dissolute as MARMILLIO was, the thoughts of Murder shock'd him, especially when propos'd by a Woman, and one who had willingly continued in the nearest Intimacy with the Person stie would destroy. There are Countries, Madam, answer'd hey aster a little 'Pause, where those Bravoes you talk of are easy to be founds but if there are any of that Calling in Caramania, I protest to you I know them not. However, continued he, when he had again taken a little time for Consideration, I will endeavour to give you the Ease you seem to wisli, though by means left cruel than you mention'd. I care not by what way, said foe, you secure my Reputation from his Tongue, and deliver me from the Constraint I am under, in suffering his odious Caresses s and my Heart, my Soul, my All shall be at your devotion.' MARMILLIO would fain have receiv'd his Hire before his Work was done, but OLIMPIA would not consent No, my Lord, said she, when he importun'd her, set me free from the detested Obligations I am under, and I can then receive your Embraces with satisfaction. He was able to obtain no more of her, and took his leave to go about the Execution of what he had promised, which he accomplished by these means.
  He had an acquaintance with a Captain, who traded to the farther part of the Western tern Ocean, the Ship was at that time ready to set sail and OLIMPIA sending SILO on board, under pretence of carrying a Letter to the Captain, which he was to deliver to some Friend she had in that Country for which he was bound the poor Fellow was immediately clapp'd under Hatches, and, like other Felons, was made a Transport for the Theft he had committed on his Lady's Honour. After which, MARMILLIO received from OLIMPIA as full a Gratification of his Desires, as he had hoped, or she had promised.
  While the elder Brother was thus engaged, the younger was not left without his Amusements. ARSINOE had Fondness enough for him to oblige her to an endeavour to attract all his Moments but in spite of all she could do, his Heart could hot disentangle itself from that Snare, which the Charms of ATTALINDA had spread a. bout it. The unknown Lady also, who had writ so obliging a Letter to him, sometimes came in for a part in his divided Sentiments Love of the one, and Curiosity to discover the other, took up so much of his Thoughts, that it was as much as all the Endearments of ARSINOE could boast, to claim a small share in his Inclinations. He would have given almost any thing he was master of, to have known who the Lady was, whom he had made such an Impression on but not all his Penetration could serve him so far, and he was as much to seek as ever, when he received a second Billet from her, which contained these Lines.
 TO THE ACCOMPLISHED Cleomenes. 
HOW long will you suffer yourself to be accus'd of Unkindness, or Stupidity? For to one of these two must be ascrib'd your refusing that Return my Passion hoped.——But perhaps you are not yet insensible on whom your Charms have wrought this Effect, and find nothing in me which can induce you to more than Compassion for the Languishments you have caus'd  wish to Heaven I knew the happy Beauty for whom you are ungrateful to all others if worthy of your Love, I might endure my Fate with less regret but if to the faint and prostituted Graces of ARSINOE I owe the Misery of hopeless Tenderness, I must confess that I am not able to support the Shock.
I beg, therefore, that you will gratify me in one Request which is, that if that Creature be not the Mistress of your Affections, you will come into the Drawing room tomorrow with a white Feather in your Hat, instead of a crimson one, which you have been accustom'd to wear but if she be, which, alas! I too U 'much much fear, make no alteration in your Dress. This, if you oblige me in, I will not fail to requite by some Favour or other, which shall be adequate to the Obligation. Farewell! I wish you were less lovely, or I more worthy of attracting your kind Wishes.
Yours, Tenderly Devoted.
  At sight of the Hand, which he perfectly knew again, he hoped this was an Eclaircissement of what he so much desired to know but perceiving that this CYNTHIA still concealed herself behind a Cloud, he was more uneasy and discontented than before. He did not fail, however, to oblige her in the Request she had made him, and appear'd the next day dress'd after the richest and most becoming manner he could invent, and a milk-white Feather in his Hat. —— There was a great Court that day but among all the Ladies who were there, tho' he look'd in the Faces of them all, with Eyes the most enquiring that could be, he saw nothing in any of them which could give him any light into the Truth. AS he was in a deep Cogitation on this Affair, ATTALINDA came to. the place where he was standing and giving him a little rap on the Arm, You seem, said she, another Man, methinks, today, CLEOMENES! 
Pray to what fair Lady's Eyes do we owe the Alteration of your Colours, and your Humour I These Words proceeding from a Mouth which had so much charm'd him, made hirri immediately resume his former Vivacity  and looking on her with the most tender Air, The Change of my Colours, Madam, answer'd he, is not a Symptom of tht Alteration of my Heart, which never was' fettAble of a true Passion, but for One Object, nor never can descend beneath the gPorious Flatne with which at first it was inspired. Few Men, said she, speak with this wawnth of an absent Mistress and by your declaring yourself in this manner, I cannot but imagine I am of the acquaintance of this happy Lady. If so, make no scruple to reveal who she is, I assure you I can be a faithful Confidante. She is indeed of your acquaintance, reply'd he, and I am confident will act in every thing according to your Desires But before I presume to name her to you, I must engage' your Promise to plead my Cause with the utmost Eloquence, and all the Arguments of prevailing Love. Tell her I love her more than Words can speak that all my Nights and Days are taken up in Contemplation on her Charms that I have no Wish but what is her's.
   She forms my Dreams, and renders all my waking Moments happy, or curs'd, acU z  cording cording as she smiles or frowns. Tell her, that for a long Age of Days I thus have languish'd and tho' I never yet have dar'd to reveal my Passion, it has taken too deep a root ever to be remov'd, or banish'd from my Soul. The Face of ATTALINDA was sometimes cover'd with a scarlet Blush, at others, with a livid Paleness while he was speaking which he observing, interpreted not to his disadvantage, and in spite of all he had been told of her Passion for PHILARCHUS, from that moment conceiv'd a hope of being able to supplant him. Well, said she, with a Countenance in which Joy and Fear were visibly painted, when I know to whom I should address these Discourses, I will not omit any thing which may promise you Success and, indeed, I think a Passion such as you describe, join'd with your other Merits, may almost assure you of it. These Expressions, and the Air with which they were pronounced, was a sufficient Encouragement for him to declare what he had till now, but with the utmost Pain, conceal'd. He presently told her it was ho other than herself, and demanded the performance of her Promise , on which she look'd a little grave But tho' she drew her Features into an Air of the most rescrvedness she could assume, yet he easily saw she was not in the least offended at what he had said. This is strange Discourse, resumed she, from one who I know professes himself the Lover of ARSINOE. The most modest Virgin, when attack'd with the pro sanest Impudence, could not appear with greater Confusion, than did CLEOMENES at the Name of ARSINOE he could not have imagin d that a Lady who was so severe on the Failings of others, would herself expose her own, nor was there any probability ATTALINDA could have this In formation from any other hand But recovering himself as well as he. could, he thought it better to relate the Truth of every thing, which he did exactly, tho' in a fashion as favourable as he could for ARSINOE. There is not one tittle of this Adventure, said she, laughing, as soon as he had done peaking, but what I have heard with this addition to it, that you had with a great deal of Wit and Illnature ridicul'd my want of Beauty, and spoke things so greatly to my disadvantage, that I must confess I had not so ill an opinion of myself, as to believe I pretend not to Beauty, yet know I am not ugly  —
My Humour is not the most entertaining in the world, neither is it disagreeable  nor am I quite a Fool, or have a stinking Breath, or a thousand other Imperfections, which I am told you branded me with.
  CLEOMENES had scarce Patience to hear her talk in this manner, without interrupting but finding she seem'd not to give credit to so cruel an Aspersion, he was the more easily satisfy'd but when he perceiv'd he had done, he entreated her to let him know by whom he had been so barbarously wrong'd. A very little persuasion serv'd to prevail on her, to tell him it was from ARSINOE she had heajd the Character he had given of her which enraged him to that violent degree, that he made no scruple of letting het know that Lady had turn'd her own Words upost him.
  All this Discourse happening in the Presence Chamber, .they had no opportunity to give each other those Testimonies of their mutual Approbation, which, both with equal Adour long'd for but ATAUNDA giving him permission to visit hefi jn the Evening, she order'd things so against his coming, that he found no Obstacles to impede his Wishes. ,
  In fine, he obtain d of her the Joy he so long had languish'd for and in the Transports of then mutual Endearments, she confess'd that it was from her he had received those two Letters, which had given him so much disquiet, while ignorant of the Author always liked, said she, and had an Affection for your Person but when you came to visit me with MAZARES, was more charmed with your Wit an. Behaviour. When you were gone, ARSINO? made me the Confidante of what had pass'd between you, and the Baseness of MAZARES in having betray'd her to you was not without some Envy, when I heard her speak with how much Rapture you return'd the Condescensions made you, but could not believe she had Charms capable of securing your Heart for ever And when she told me that you had pass'd some Censures on me, which I was conscious I did not merit, I was so far from giving credit to what she said, that I imagin'd you had mention' d me but with too much regard for her Repose and to prevent me from having the same Sentiments, had invented that heap of Absurdities. In order, therefore, to be upon the square with her, I writ to you. The Success has answer'd my utmost Wishes, and if you can resolve to be constant, think myself the most fortunate of my Sex, in having engaged you.
  'Tis not to be suppos'd that there was any Deficiency of Oaths or Vows, to make her secure of his eternal Faith and she was Woman, easily deluded Woman, and gave credit to all the Asseverations he made. Being now possess'd of all the Intimacies he wish'd, he took the liberty of complaining that he had still a fear, that her Heart was not so wholly his, as the Ardency of his Affection made him desire and then related, tho' not in terms which she could be offended at, what he had been told concerning PHILARCHUS. ATTALINDA was perfectly free from all Hypocrisy, and frankly confess'd that she once had been posscss'd of the most tender Sentiments, in favour of that young Gentleman but that his Ingratitude had entirely erased them, she having discovered, that, in spite of a thousand Obligations he had to her, he made the most solemn Protestations of Affection to a mean Creature, inferiour to her in every Circumstance.
  CLEOMENES lov'd her not the less for the Freedom with which she acknowledg'd the Folly of her former Fondness and thinking himself perfectly happy in that she now testified for him, nothing could be more felicitous, than the Moments they pass'd together. The Good nature and Indolence of the Husband gave them frequent opportunities of seeing each other, in as private a manner as either of them could wish ATTALINDA desir'd no other Proof of his Affection, than that he would entirely quit the Society of ARSINOE, which he accordingly did Nor found he much Reluctance in his compliance with that Request. All naturally despise what comes with too much cafeand that very Consideration should have made ATTALINDA, had she not been of a Disposition too gay to be capable of any solid Reflection, tremble ble at her own Fate, and remember that nothing can be more true, than those Words of the Poet, which thus reminds that easy Sex to be cautious in what manner they bestow their Favours
All naturally fly what does pursue 'Tis fit Men should be coy, when Women woo. 
End of Part the Fifth 

Part VI and Last
  IT was not the Charms of OLIMPIA, or any other Woman, could make MARMILLIO neglectful of what he owed his Prince he saw him torn with the severest Anguish, for the expected departure of his dear Mistress he found also in that Lady a Despair which nothing could surmount, and kept his Brain on a continual rack, for some Stratagem to prevent the Misfortune which both equally dreaded. But all his Invention now was at a loss the Princess, whose Commands alone had the power to awe ADRASTUS into silence, had given him her Promise, that ISMONDA should go with him and tho' that subtile Woman omitted nothing which she thought might prevail on her, to retract what she had said, yet HYANTHE continued firm in her Resolution and the excessive Uneasiness which the other express'd at the thoughts of returning to her native Country, to her Kindred, and with a Husband, who had ever been most tender of her, at length made every body imagine there was something more in this Reluctance, than she made show of, and occasion'd a stricter Scrutiny into her Behaviour than usual. The Prince for that reason was now oblig'd to refrain from seeing her, unless in publick and whenever they had any thing to communicate to each other, MARMILLIO was the Person who convey'd the Letters and Messages. Nothing, however, being concluded on to stop the impending Evil, and the time prefix'd for the departure of ADRASTUS arriv'd, there remain'd no other Expedient, than that ISMONDA should openly refuse accompanying him, under the pretence, that having jealous Notions in his Head, she apprehended some illusage from him. This was an excuse which pass'd current but with a very few, because Anatolia being the place of her Nativity, and where she had many great and powerful Relations, to whom she might apply in case of his Unkindness, her Causes of Fear appear'd to have no real Foundation. And nothing was now more publickly talk'd of, than that it was more her Aversion for ADRASTUS, than Love for HYANTHE, which would not suffer her to leave the Court of Caramania. The Eyes of that Princess also being now partly open, as to the Artifices of that fair Hypocrite, she talk'd to her in a manner, which convinced her she no longer thought herself obliged by her stay. How great a Vexation this was to a Woman, who priz'd her Reputation above all things, excepting her Passion, any one may judge. She gave herself up to the most terrible Reflections, she wept incessantly when in private, and could not so far restrain herself in publick, but that it was easy for any one who saw her, to perceive the trouble she was in. Nor did THEODORE think himself less unhappy, or had more the power of concealing his Chagrin and their mutual Discontent was so apparent, that scarce any Person about Court, but thought as much as ARIDANOR knew of the Misfortune of ADRASTUS. 
  MARMILLIO, who was perfectly acquainted with what was said, endeavour'd to stifle such Conjectures, but in vain every one whisper'd it about, and the Blindness of the Princess, and the Ingratitude of her Woman, became at once the Theme of both Pity and Detestation. ISMONDA, however, having long since abandon'd Virtue, was now preparing herself to oppose Shame  and since Love and Glory in her Circumstances were grown things incompatible, to preserve the one, chose to renounce the other  and at last brought her assurance to so high a pitch, as to tell the Princess, that if she discharg'd her from her Service, it was a Misfortune, which to bear she must study Patience, but nothing but being banish'd from Caramania should oblige her to quit it——Nor even then, would it be to Anatolia she would repair. Your Highness, said she resolutely, has power to drive me from a place where you are Sovereign, but not to confine me to the House of a Husband, whose ill Treatment has render'd odious to me all places where he is, and from whose mistaken Jealousy I have reason to apprehend the most terrible Consequences. The Prince, in whose presence she utter'd this, imagin'd he might now add something in her favour, without seeming to do so out of any other Motive, than pity for her Misfortunes, and that Complaisance which might be expected from him to a Woman of her Quality. The Secrets of Marriage, Madam, said he to the 'Princess, are only known to Persons united in those Bonds, nor are any others a fit Judge of the Causes of domestick Differences. Pardon me, therefore, if I think 'twould be an Act of Cruelty to abandon a Lady in her Extremity, who depends alone on you for Protection, and what I am certain your Goodness will hereafter regret, when you shall hear, as probably you may, that this ADRASTUS, whom you think so just, shall make no other use of your discharging from your Service his Wife, than to revenge himself on her for an imagin'd Wrong. — Jealousy is a Passion the most terrible, and least capable of forgiving of any, for which the Soul finds room and I entreat, in favour of this afflicted Beauty, that you will not send her from you, at a time when her only Asylum is here. Consider, Madam! continued he, more firenuously, she had not quitted Anatolia, but for the dutiful Regard and Love she bore HYANTHE nor had ADRASTUS Notions to her prejudice, but for the long absence which those Motives occasion'd Shall you then, you, for whose sake she has incurred his Displeasure, abandon her to the Effects of it? O! let it never be said a Sovereign has so ill requited the Faith and Zeal of a Subject. .
  Tis certain, that at the beginning of this Discourse he destgn'd not to pursue it so far but having once open'd his Mouth, to plead a Cause in which he was so deeply interested, he could not so far be master of himself, as to conclude just when it was consistent with Prudence. The Princess look'd on him with a fix'd regard all the time he was speaking and as she wanted not Penetration, tho' for a long time deceived by her own Virtue into a Belief of others, now saw what she, of all the world, was last convinc'd of. But as she was Mistress of great Wisdom, Conduct, and Presence of Mind, she in a moment recollected what would best become her to do and after taking a very little time for consideration, answer'd him in this manner Never shall it be said, that a Wife, who boasts to know the Duty of that State, presumed to contradict her Husband's Will. ISMONDA, Sir, shall still continue in Caramania  but remember, that the only Incitement to my Grant, is my Obedience.
  Her Heart was now too full to utter more, and retired that moment with precipitation into her Closet s where she shut herself up, and gave a loose to the overboiling Passions of her troubled Soul. She now found that the hopes she had long siatter'd herself with, of being Mistress of the Affections of THEODORE, were but in vain and that while she imagin'd she had the most faithful Friend in ISMONDA, she had been cherishing a Viper to sting her irr the most tender Parti It was with an in! finity of Tenderness she regarded her Husband, and was as iensible as Woman could be, of the wrong he had done her Love and Virtue yet did she entertain no thoughts of revenging it in the manner some Wives would do, nor vented her Discontent in Revilings, and Exclamations, as it is ordinary for Women to do on those occasions. 
To Heaven alone did she complain, ancl from the divine Powers entreated either a Mitigation of her Misfortunes, or Patience to endure them. And indeed it must be confessd, that never Wife was an Example of greater Resignation, Fortitude, and Moderation. She consider'd, that to fly into Passion, would but render her Condition worse, by exposing to the World her Husband's Weakness, and her want of that Power she ought to have over him that Pity was but a poor Relief for a Misfortune such as her's, yet that was all she could expect by revealing it and that to accuse the Prince with any terms of Wrath, would but provoke him to avow his Crime to her face, and by that means lay her under the necessity either of coming to an open Rupture with him, or, by brooking such a Contempt tamely, testify a meanness of Spirit, which was not in her nature. She chose therefore not to seem to know what, acknowledging to know, she must resent, but had not the power of redressing.
  Would all Wives take this method, there would not so many of them become hateful to their Husbands, and despicable in the eyes of their Acquaintance, who, for the most part, more scorn than pity their want of Charms. Never was any Heart less capable of Hypocrisy, than that of HYANTHE i and tho' her Prudence made her resolve, neither by her Words or Actions, to give the Prince room to imagine she had the least jealous Thought, yet could she not at all times so well disguise the Truth, but that he discover'd it and if this Conduct did not make him love, it caused in him the extremest Veneration and Esteem for her. And he finding him increase in the Respect he paid her, more easily endured his want Of Love, hoping that also would ensue and that When satiated with the .Possession of unlicens'd Charms, he might at last return to those which had a just Claim to his Regard, and by his future Tenderness repay the too long neglected Merits of a suffering Wife. But in what terms is impossible to describe in any manner, which can give the Reader a just Notion! of it, the Distraction of ADRASTUS, when he found himself by this means disappointed of revenging the Injury he too well knew was done him by this ungrateful Wife. He made his Complaint to all to whom he spoke, of the Injustice done him, in detaining from him the Woman, whom by all she Laws of Heaven and Earth was his, engaged the whole Body of the reverend Magi to urge the Princess in his behalf but all being unsuccessful, scarce could he refrain from uttering all he knew, and exposing the Guilt of THEODORE, which he imagin'd was yet a Secret to HYANTHE yet in spite of the tempestuous Passion which invaded him, and like an Earth quake shook his tormented Soul, so true was his Affection for his Sovereign, that he forbore, painful as the Restraint was to him, uttering the least Syllable, which might occasion a suspicious Thought to the prejudice of his Daughter's Repose. ARIDANOR and CLEARCHUS were the only Persons to whom he discours'd with freedom of his Misfortune and the former of these was now involv'd in Vexations, which left him little the power of listening to those of other People.
  The Intrigue between him and ZELINDA had now lasted a considerable time for Persons of their gay Temper  the Condescensions she had made him, and the Submission she had testify'd on the score of ELARIA, however, making him imagine she felt really for him what might be call'd a true Affection, made him endeavour to be as grateful as possible and tho' nothing could be a Task more severe than that he impos'd on himself in this behaviour, he exerted all the Man about him to dissemble a Tenderness for her, equal to that she had seem'd to have for him but how easy is it for those who are at all acquainted with the Passion, to distinguish the true Ardours from the counterfeit? She plainly saw that he would find nothing less difficult, than to part from her, if he could find a handsome pretence for it which Indifference, join'd to the incefTant Importunities of a new Adorer, made her become as negligent in her Endearments, as of late she had perceiv'd he was. And one Evening, perceiving he came not at the appointed Hour, she gave admittance to her new Enamoratoand to prevent any Interruption in the Entertainment she was now resolv'd to permit him to give her, writ to ARIDANOR a Billet, containing these Lines.
  To the Inconstant ARIDANOR. 
THEN I so readily forgave your Intrigue with EL ARIA, it was not 'that I lov'd too little, but too much ill 'therefore does your Indifference repay so 'true a Passion, and worse would it be come me to receive the Caresses of a Man, who, by the faintness of them, denotes he is no longer influenc'd by Inclination. '———For Heaven's fake then throw off 'this forc'd Complaisance! I have now 'brought myself to a Disposition to endure your absence without complaining 'and as I am perfectly acquainted with the 'Change in your Sentiments, shall make 'no scruple to declare mine, and assure 'you that it is my desire we should meet no more as Lovers, and that you should, but as a Dream, remember what has passed between You and Zelinda. 
  Her new Admirer being in the Room while she step'd into her Closet to write this, she was in so much haste to return to him, that she entirely forgot to order the Page, by whom she sent it, to give it into no other Hand than that of ARIDANOR himself who being at that time from home, the inadvertent Boy deliver'd it to his Gentleman, with whom, however, it had been sufficiently secure, had not BARSINA unluckily crois'd the Hall the moment of its being brought. The fight of the Page, the knowledge of his Lady's Humour, and the Observation she had made on the frequent Visits which her Lord had for some time made there, gave her a sort of jealous Curiosity to know the Contents of this Letter. The Emissary of ZELINDA was therefore no sooner out of the House, than she commanded the other to give it her, which he endeavouring to evade, increas'd her Suspicion, and her Resolution to become Mistress of it. ARIDANOR, said she, has no Secrets to which I am a Stranger, nor will he condemn you for entrusting in my hands any Paper directed for him  but to remove whatever Fears your Duty may suggest on this occasion, I give you my Honour not to open it' 'the Seal, till broke by him, shall remain untouch'd, and it is only with a design of a little innocent Raillery, that I desire to be the bearer of it myself. The Gentleman, who knew the perfect Agreement between them, and beside cou d not imagine that if there were any Affair improper to be communicated to her, ZELINDA would have taken so little Care in the delivering it, made no farther hesitation to obey her. She retir'd immediately with it in her Hand, but being a Woman nicely punctual to her Word, would not venture to break it open, but laying it carefully up in her Cabinet, resolv'd to proceed in such a manner, as should fully inform her of the Contents, without running the hazard of incurring the Displeasure of her Lord, or forfeiting her Promise to his Gentleman. She was however in the utmost uneasiness till ARIDANOR came in she long'd to be convine'd of that, which she but too much fear'd, when known, would be far from restoring her to that Tranquillity she was us'd to enjoy yet so terrible to be borne are perturbations of Suspence, that whoever labours under them, would fly to the most stabbing certainty for change of Torment.
  At length he came, and she no sooner saw his Chariot enter the Courtyard, from' a Window where she sat on purpose to observe, than she sent to desire he would come. to her instantly which request being inv mediately comply'd with, she. saluted him in these Terms My Lord, said she a Letter directed for you, has fallen, by accident, into my hands but as I. have been so honourable not to open it, I hope you are too generous not to.. communicate the Contents of it to me, the manner of its being brought having fill'd me with a Curiosity, which I am the less asham'd to confess, because it is the first time I ever was guilty of it. These Words, and the sight of the Hand, cover'd the whole Face of ARIDANOR with a scarlet Blush never, before, had he experienc'd such a Dilemma, he knew not how either to evade, or comply with her entreaty and having stood for some moments silent, and in a Posture which heighten'd her Suspicions, at last, Madam, said he, but not without some hesitation in his Voice, this Letter, tho directed form, is intended for another Person and I cannot, without the utmost injustice to those who have intrusted me, make even you a partner in the Secret. O Sex most fertile in Invention, and practis'd in Deceit! erf a'fie, unable to contain the Pangs which Jealousy now shot through every aching Fibre os her Heart, I expected some such mean Equivocation from a Guilt like thine. Man, however imperious, lord and unforgiving when in power, is ever fawning, fearful, and poor in Spirit, when detection's near, and stretches out her uncorrupted Hand to draw from off his Crime the Vail which has obscured it.——Ungrateful Lord! pursued she, Is it to the Lover of ZELINDA I have preserv'd myself true a Wife! Is it thus, that Virtue, Truth, and Tenderness must be repaid!
O could I as easily throw off those Principles in which my Youth was bred, forget, like thee, all fense of Honour and of Shame, how might I make thee tremble at my Revenge? In spite of thy Indifference, I am still thy Wife, and by that Title, am impower'd, when e'er I please, to load thee with Disgrace, great as the Indignity thou hast offer'd me But well, alas! thou knowest, I too much fear the Gods, and prize my own unspotted Purity, to retaliate in kind the wrong thou hast done me, Go on then, fin in security, and laugh at my Reproaches but think not that high Heaven will always suffer thee to triumph over the sacred Laws, and abuse the Virtue of an enduring Wife.
  In this manner did she continue, venting the tempestuous Passions of her Soul, for a considerable time, without his offering one word of Interruption but at length, that Tenderness which had at first engaged him to marry her, and had never since forsook his Breast, gave way to the natural vehemence and impatience of his Temper. He now ceaslorto deny, or to excuse his Crime and telling her, That whatever Faults the heats of Youth might have made him guilty of, it.ought. nos to be a Person who had so well profited by the Folly of his amorous Inclination that should upbraid him with it, flung out of the Chamber, leaving her when Rage a little abated, and gave room for cool Reflection, to repent that she so far had urg'd him. 
  When ARIDANOR had enough recovers himself from that sudden disorder which his late Rage had involv'd him in, he read the Tetter which had been the Cause of it he wrould have thank'd ZELINDA for discharging him from his Attendance, had she done it in any other manner but the imprudence of her Conduct, in exposing both herself and him, to that very Person,'from whom of all the World she mould most carefully have conceal'd their Amour, made him now despise and hate, what,before he had but a small share of esteem for. He blamed his Wife also for the Terms in which she had express'd her Resentment, much more than for the Resentment itself but as he truly Jov'd her, he easily absoly'd her this little Fault, which he Was sensible was more occasions by the extreme Tenderness she had for him, than by any thing of that womanish 'fria'e, which, as frequently as Love, renders a Wife tenacious of het'Prerogative, and jealous of her Right.' He Would not, however, seem to forgive what she had said, resolving to make his own use of the opportunity she had given him, to execute a Design which he had for. some time been. forming, but could not till now bring to perfection.
  ALMIRA began to show the Misfortune which her inadvertent Passion had drawn on her, in too visible a manner for him not to fear it would soon become so to the whole World and having of late no opportunity of speaking to IDOMEUS concerning the Affair, that young Lord absenting himself from his House, and keeping for the most part out of town, he had for a long time been prodigiously uneasy, that she did not make some pretence to remove which perceiving she made not the least Effort to do, he thought he had now a fit Excuse, on his Quarrel with her Sister, to desire she would quit his House. He therefore resolv'd to keep up his Resentment and tho' BARSINA, sensible of the wrong step she had taken, entreated to be admitted, he shut himself up, refus'd to fee her, and sent her word, that if she desir'd to expiate the Fault she had been guilty of, her best way would be not to remind him of it, by coming into his presence, till he should let her know he had forgiven it.
But not being able long to counterfeit this cruel Humour to a Woman he so sincerely lov'd as BARSINA, as well as because he thought it full time AIMJRA should be gone, he order'd his Page to carry a Letter to her Chamber, which contained these Lines.
  To ALMIRA. 
YO U are not ignorant that no other Motive, than the most pure Affection to BARSINA, made me become her Husband, nor that the Love I bore her made every thing which was dear to her esteem'd by me. As a Sister, you have been treated by me with a Brother's Tenderness but as the Circumstances in which we once stood have changed their face accuse it not as a Levity in me, that I 'desire you to remove to some place where you may reside with more ease, than you can at present in the Family of the DISCONTENTED Aridanor. 
  P. S. 'The sooner you provide yourself,  the better, because here may happen Ruptures will no way please you to be witness of. Farewell every thing is not what it seems, nor I so much unkind as this 'Epistle may make me appear in your Imagination.
 
  Let any one put themselves, if Imagination can so far transport them, one moment into the Condition of the unhappy ALMIRA and they may then, but no otherwise, be able to conceive what 'twas she endur'd. She doubted not but the Secret of her Misfortune was divulg'd, and suppos'd that only that was the occasion of those Ruptures mention'd in the Postscript. ARIDANOR had indeed contriv'd it with so much Art, that she might believe it to be so, yet no other Person to whom she might happen to show k, have suspicion of the Truth.— ''' What could she now do? To whom could she have recourse for Advice? IDOMEUS she had not seen for some days, and she guess'd the reason of his absence, was on account of what had pass'd between them being discover'd. Her Sister was in so great a disorder, that she desird none might come into her Chamber, and this afflicted Beauty now look'd on that also as proceeding from the same Cause Believing herself therefore the occasion of the whole Disturbance which had happen'd in the Family, she resolv'd to go out of it immediatelyand as none of those to whom she imagin'd her Shame was known demanded to see her, had little Inclination to desire it. Distracted therefore with the various Idea's that ran that moment thro' her her whirling Brain, she bid her Woman pack up her Clothes, and every thing belonging to her, in order to leave a House which had been so fatal to her. Let us make haste, said she to her, to be gone from this detested place, this Scene of Ruin, Perjury, and Deceit, arid where even Nature fails to take the part of one, who ought to be most dear by Blood and Interest BARSIIA, that once dear Sister, that engaging Friend, here forsakes ALMIRA, and drives her put [to Misery and Shame, and all the Woes that attend helpless and betray'd Innocence. Gods! continued she, is the Fault I have committed of that unpardonable nature, that none will vouchsafe a hand to help me!— If I have thrown a Stain on my Family, and thereby forfeited my Pretensions to the Favour I might expect from a Sister so severely virtuous, must ARIDANOR too abandon me? Must he expose and thrust me out to the wide pitiless World? —He, whom had I never seen, I had been happy, IDOMEUS had been then a stranger to my Eyes, nor had I stood in need of Friendship, or Assistance! — O Monster! Villain! perfidious, ungrateful IDOMEUS! added she, after a little Pause, to what unfathomable Depth of Wretchedness hast thou reduced me! She utter'd these Words with too much Vehemence for them not to be observ'd, by her Woman man and another Servant, who were then waiting in the Room. It was not, however, their business to take notice they observ'd any thing farther than what she had commanded and 'tis possible, tho' not exceeding probable, according to the Disposition of the greatest part of those of their Profession, that their Lady's Secret might have been safe in their possession, had nothing else happen'd to betray it  But alas! the Disorders of this poor Lady's Mind wrought so far on her Body, that the Effect was presently discern'd in more than Words each Limb began to tremble with convulsive Strugglings, and every Nerve confess'd an Agony before unknown. In fine, she fell into that Condition, which those who are most experienced in it dread, but which in its first tryal is scarce to be supported. No longer now had she the power of retaining Sense either of Shame or Fear Resentment too was banish'd from her Breast, and all the Wish was left her, was to be eas'd by any Means, or Person. Her Woman presently conceiving what her Condition was, and fearing the Agonies she saw her in, if riot immediately reliev'd, would be her death, ran to acquaint BARSINA with the News. At first she was deny'd admittance by the Lady's Page, who waited in an outer Room but her crying out that ALMIRA was dying, and the Shrieks of that unhappy Creature by this time reaching the Ears of the whole Family, her Sister open'd the Door, to know the meaning of so confused a Noise which being whisper'd to her by the Attendant of ALMIRA, me accompany'd her, almost wild with Astonishment and Grief, to her Chamber, where she indeed found her in a Condition such as could leave no room to imagine it any other than really it was. Utterly impossible is it to express the mingled Rage and Concern, which at this Object invaded the whole Soul of the virtuous BARSINA yet in this juncture, testifying a more than ordinary Presence of Mind, and prizing the Reputation of her Sister above even her Life, she order'd a HackneyChair to be brought immediately to the Door, and forced her into it, giving the Charge herself to the Men to what place they should carry her, which was to the House of a Midwife, whom she knew she could oblige to keep the Secret. She had no sooner dispatch'd her from view, than she sent her Woman after her with such things as were proper for the Condition she was in, but continued in the most terrible Agonies for so unexpected and so shameful an Accident.
  In the mean time, the Author of this Misfortune, inconstant IDOMEUS, was engaged in Adventures, which made him wholly negligent of what might befall this wretched Victim of his wavering Desires. By accident, he had one day stray'd into the Temple of the Sun, a place he was used but little to frequent but as if the God had determin'd to take vengeance on him, for the little regard he paid to his Altars, he no sooner approach'd the sacred Shrine, than he was struck with a sudden fire, more fierce than even his Rays, unaided by the Charms of Beauty, had the power of kindling. The sparkling Eyes of LUTHELINA, a young Virgin of noble Blood, being placed opposite to the spot on which he stood, shot into the very Soul of the amorous Youth such Flames, as were not to be extinguish'd but by Enjoyment Strong as swift he felt their mighty Force but that not being a place in which he could accost her in the manner he wish'd to do, the sacred Ceremony over, he order'd his Page to follow and observe into what House she went, and not to return without a suit Information of her Name, and the Circumstances of her present Condition. IDOMEUS was of a Disposition arbitrary over those on whom he had power, resolute in having his Commands fulfiird, and sufficiently generous in rewarding Services, to engage the utmost from his Dependants. The Person whom he employ'd on this Errand, had too much to fear from his .Indignation, and also to hope from his Liberality, bcttality, not to make him diligent in his Enquiries and he so well succeeded in them, as to bring him an account that this young Beauty was the Daughter of a Dalmatian Lord, who, having wasted the best part of his Fortune in an unsuccessful Quarrel, had left her, With two other Sisters, wholly on the dependance of an Aunt, who was happily married to one of the most wealthy Commoners in Caramania by whom having no Children, and now of an Age too much advanced to hope for any, the three Orphans had been educated as her own and that the two elder. being married with her Consent, had received from her Bourtty Portions equal to what might have been expected with them, had they been really her own But this blooming Charmer attracting the universal Admiration of the Men, the old Lady kept in a very close Restraint, never permitting her to go abroad without her, or receive any Visits but such as she was pleased to think proper. This Account was but little pleasing to IDOMEUS he had not only the Virtue and Virgin Fearfulness of the young one to combat With, but also the watchful Diligence of the old one to deceive he was resolv'd, however, not to give way to Despair, without having first made a tryal of the Difficulties which he must surmount to become Master of his Wishes. Having no acquaintance with any of the Family, nor with any who could introduce him, he made it his business to find out what publick Places the Uncle most frequented which having learn'd, he never fail'd meeting him, and by degrees brought himself so much into his good Opinion, that he invited him to his House. This was all at present our young Adventurer requir'd and being one day press’d. By him in a very friendly manner to go home with him from the Tennis Court, where they had been at play, he joyfully accepted the Offer and the more gladly, because it being before Dinner, he was certain of feeing the Ladies.
  Thus far every thing succeeded according to his wish i but never was Man so confused as he, when, the Tabk being ierv'd, the Aunt and Niece appear'd, the fulsome Compliments he receiv'd from the one, and the Beauties of the other rendring him incapable of judging in what manner he should behave. He no sooner began to say a gallant thing to the ope, than the other would interrupt him, by telling him how like her Niece was to her, and twenty times over assuring him, that tho' she was her Aunt, she was very little older  that. her Brother was a Man when she was no more than a Child, and that LUTHELINA and she, by those who knew them not, were taken for Sisters. Had it been at any other.
Other time, the Vanity of this Beldame would have been a sufficient matter of Diversion to him but the Impertinence of her Chat now hindring him from declaring his Sentiments to the young Lady, made him almost distracted and scarce cou'd he refrain from letting her see by his Answers, that it was of little consequence to him of what Age she was but with the Praises she was incest santly giving herself, she mingled so many of him, that it was not in his power to be rude, and at last put a thought into his Head which he resolv'd to cherish as a fortunate one.
  He judg'd, with Reason, that when a Woman takes an overcare to appear amiable in the eyes of Mankind, it is not without an ambition of being told she is so and that such a Person might, with ease, be brought to believe any thing by him she imagines is her Lover. To counterfeit that Character, he presently perceiv'd was the only means to engage one of hers to his Interest and tho he could not, as yet, form any direct Rules in what manner he should proceed hereafter, he fancy'd it would be the best beginning he could make not doubting, but when he was once become free enough in the Family, to have an opportunity of talking to the young Lady, he should easily convince her, it was not the antiquated Beauties of her Aunt, which render'd him so assiduous, lo fine, he turn'd the whole Frame of hi Behaviour and Discourse in such a manner, that she who had not for a long Series of Years known what it had been to have such fine things said to her, was perfectly trans ported, and believing him really enamour'd With her, had not the least jealous thought that he was so elsewhere, as otherwise the natural Envy of her Disposition would have made her presently observe , and was so fat from denying him admittance to her House, as he had done many who had profess'd themselves the Lovers of LUTHELINA, that she intreated him to come as frequently as he could, assur'd him her Gates should be always open to receive him and not only by her Words, but also by her Eyes, if Glances of a Woman turn'd of Fifty may be allow'd to be intelligible to a young Man of twenty five, made it her endeavour to comynce him a more welcome Guest cou'd not arrive.
  Pursuant to the first step he had taken, he manag'd the Affair so well in the succeeding Visits he made her, that in a Very small time she became enamour'd of him to the utmost pitch of Dotage which is all the Term one can afford to aWomao, who, at her Age, confesses a Passion that even Youth is put to the Blush to acknowledge. But being belov'd by her, was the least of what he.aim'd at, and as his Design was Y  through through the Aunt to make his way to the Niece, he took the opportunity her mistaken Fondness gave him and, counterfeiting too well for one who so much contributed to her own Deception to fee into the Cheat, persuaded her to pretend a Journey to a Relation in the Country, and abscond for a small time with him. It is not to be believ'd with how much greediness me swallow'd the Bait he had prepar'd for her, and telling her Husband that she had receiv'd Letters that a Cousin of hers was extremely ill, would needs go immediately away and that, not only because she was in haste to be gone to one, who she said was so dear a Friend, but also pretending a Frugality, which she knew was not displeasing to him whom she endeavour'd to deceive, that she Would save the Charges of travelling with an Equipage, and go privately in the StageCoagh. Every thing favouring her Designs, she, like the Moon, was lost in Clouds, to have the better Opportunity of indulging her expected Raptures with the lov'd ENDIMION, invisible by mortal Eyes. IDOMEUS contriv'd the place to which she went, should be so near the Town, that he could withea.se go thither every day, and return at night, which he was always punctual in doing, to take off all suspicion !that he had any other design in visiting thelgreat City, than to prevent the scandalous Observers of the Intimacy between them, from imagining they were gone together Now was the beauteous LUTHEL IN A left a defenceless Prey to the subtile Invaders the watchfulness of her Aunt had, hitherto, taken away all occasion for her setting that guard over herself, which all Women are instructed in, and which, when ever they stray, most certain Ruin overtakes their Steps and she was as incapable of resisting the Impulses which Love and Nature create in a youthful Breast, as she would have been to have subdu'd an Army by any other Weapons than her Eyes. IDOMEUS needed no more than to declare his Passion to inspire an equal share in her the little she had been suffer'd to hear of Discourses of this kind, made her now listen to what he said with double Pleasure and by reading of Romances, having been taught, that to be ador'd was the Prerogative of her Sex, had too often look'd on it as a hardship to be deny'd that Triumph, not to consider the Liberty she now enjoy'd, as the greatest Blessing could have befallen her. This was indeed a Disposition which might have been fatal instead of advantageous to his Designs, because the same Motives which induced'her Vanity to give ear to him with pleasure, would certainly have inclin'd her to receive the same Declarations from others also , but to prevent this Evil, he took carenever toft Y  be absent from her but in those hours which call'd him to her Aunt, and in which she could not, with decency, admit the Visits of Persons of a different Sex.
  What is it that continu'd Importunities, when mix'd with Inclination, and favour'd by Time and Place, bring to pass! The Vanity of this young Charmer first inclin'd her to receive his Addresses his Accomplishments and agreeable Person, brought her afterwards to be as well pleas'd with the Lovev as the Love  and the Softness of her Sex at last, to think nothing too much to reward an Affection, which she imagin'd no less Jincere than it appear'd to be violent. In a word, as he wanted not Courage to ask eve ry thing of her, so there was nothing he defired, that he did not obtain. This indeed must be said of him, that in some measure he deserv'd her, since never QUIXOTB of Romance did more to obtain the DULCiNEA of his Hopes, than he, in constraining himself to counterfeit Ardors for a Woman, whose Experience render'd it very difficult to impose on her, and who would not have sail'd to have remark'd the least deficiency in Behaviour but this was a Merit of which he durst not boast, but which ajso brought with it its own Conveniencies, to make amends for the present Toil be cause whenever he grew tired with the Possessions of the Charms of his young Mitress, he had no more to do, than by growing cold to the old one, occasion her return jto Town, and by that means be releas'd from his Obligations to that undone Beau ty, without incurring the Reputation of Ingratitude or Falshood. He was too well acquainted with the Inconstancy of his own Humour, not to know that this would infalr libly happen some day or otherand felt an infinite deal of Pleasure in his own Mind, at thinking how well he was provided of an Expedient to rid himself, whenever he pleas'd, of Embraces in which he no longer cou'dfind a Joy.
  But this fell not out immediately it was in the very height of his Amour with LUTHELINA, that that unfortunate Accident hapned to ALMIRA and his time being wholly fhar'd between the amorous Aunt, and lovely Niece, he had not appear'd in the Palace of ARIDANOR for many days. His absence adding to the Distraction which her present Condition involv'd her in, made her fall into Ravings, which soon discoygr'd, to all about her, who it was that was the Author of her Shame. The News was soqn communicated to BARSINA  and that Lady thinking what she had to say, a sufficient Plea for breaking through the Injunction her Lord had lately laid on her, told ARIDAT NOR who, she suspected not, had before any knowledge of the Affair. IPOMEUS being unmarried, she propos'd that he should repair the Injury he had done her Sister, bymarrying her with all convenient speed not could less be expected from a Lady of so much Virtue, and who had all the Affection for the unfortunate ALMIR A, that could possibly be paid by one so near by Blood, But ARIDANOR, who knew the Disposition of his Brother, and also that his Gircumstaucest could not well admit of such a Match, .endeavour'd to siicnce hereby these .Words  It is not, Madam, said he, in the power of a younger Brother to marry according to his Inclinations, and I, by following mine, have render'd him yet less able to do so, than had I enrich'd my Family by bringing a Lady into it more eminent for her Wealth, than for those more .worthy Qualifications I found in you, . And is this gil the Reparation, resum'd she, that you think is owing to the poor ALMIRA for her koj&of Honour, and the Disgrace which it.MS brought on all ally'd to her? The Usitte. of my Wife defends you from that fc.fajeplf dhe., and tho I truly pity your unhappy Sister, and equally with yourself condemn ithe.Action. IDOMEUS has been guilty of, yet will I never advise him to atone for it by the way you mention I beg therefore, continued he, that for the sake of mine and your own Peace, you will cease to urge a Suit which it is determination of my Soul for ever to refuse BARSINA, whole only fault was having a Spirit a little too great, could not contain herself at these Words, and forgetting how dear her late Rashness had cost her, relaps'd into a worse and more dangerous .Excess of it? and if ARIDANOR wanted a Stock of Patience fufficierst to endure her Reproaches, even when they were occasion'd by a Fault of which he knew himself guilty, how little could he support them for a Crime transacted by another, and in which he had no hand? In fine, Passion on both sides grew too high at last to be confin'd within the bounds of even good manners, and that decorum, which ought always to be preserv'd among People of Condition, and which, indeed, more than by their Titles, distinguishes them from those of a mean Education which ARIDANOR perceiving, and fearing he might be transported to something unbecoming his Character, was enough Master of himself to quit the Room, But BARSINA thinking she had now a more justifiable reason for Resentment than before, and besides that rage of Temper she was possess'd of, being continually kept warm by the daily Complainings of her Sister, and the Whispers she heard concerning her, as her Misfortune grew more rcveal'd, could not entertain the least thought of submitting, and resolv'd in her own Mind, as much as a Woman who truly loves can do, never to be reconcil'd to her Husband without he consented to use his Utmost endeavours for the Nuptials of IDOjtfEUsandALMiRA.
  In this distracted Position were the Family and Mind of ARIDANOR, when ADRASTUS sought relief and mitigation of his Sorrows in his Advice and Society how little he was able to afford it to another, the Reader will easily judge by the knowledge how much he stood in need of it himself.—CLEARCHUS was the only Person who knew the Truth of this noble Anatolians Misfortune, and was capable of talking freely to him concerning itj all means, therefore, as has been before obscrv'd, h ving been try'd and found ineffectual for the removal of ISMONDA, it was his Counsel, that his Friend should no more add to the Torments he endur'd, by prosecuting an Endeavour which he had so often experience was but fruitless and the Persuasions of this known faithful Man, together with the apprehensions of offending the King by top long an absence, at last prevail'd on him to leave Caramwia. but with what Grief of Soul, none but a Husband who loves, and has like him been injurd, can conceive. But whatever wfre his Anxieties, they could not surpass the Transport which his departure afforded his transgressing Wife, and her enamour'd Prince. The one, now become past the care of Reputation, and the other believing himself safe from all Reproach, gave a loose to Rapture greater than ever they had durst to indulge before, and for a time, one would indeed have believ'd the Poet's Divinity had been in such a Love as theirs, so much beyond the ordinary Extasies of that Passion, were the Portion of their every meeting but as nothing but a real Godhead can be immutable, the Fiend at last disclos'd itself, and sadly transferr'd this Scene of heavenly Delights, to one all black and horrid.
  There is nothing more certain in the Affairs of Love, thanthat Security is the Pav rent of Satiety and if we in the least consult either Philosophy or Nature, 'tis easy to be accounted for. What a Man fears to lose, he is for ever endeavouring to preserve  but when Doubt is no more, and you have no farther to do than to go on in one continu'd round, the most pleasing Circle, in time, grows dull, and the pnee ardent Lover slackens in his Race the Spirits cool, and Desire begins to nod, when free from all Interruptions in the way, and unalarm'd by any pursuing Fears. Besides, of the most luscious Fruits we soonest surfeit what is given us but sparingly, would never fail to excite our keenest Appetite but when allow'd at large, and the rapacious Will is left without a Check, with too much greediness we devour, and the rich Sweets with too much Plenty cloy. To all this may be added, that ISMONDA buoying up Ambition with fancy'd Merit, and the Plea of having now abandon'd every thing for Love, was lost to all but the return of that dear ruinous Passion , imprudently exacted from the Prince as a Right, that which is never with pleasure granted when expected.— Love should be free, and unconfln'd as Air the least restraint destroys the Bliss, changes its very Nature, and perverts that ito forced Complaisance, which was before all Extasy and Joy.
  Little did MARMILLIO imagine, when he brought VIOLETTA for the betretinuance of indulging his Passion for GARICLEA, that the Beauties of that Virgin would occasion him the Troubles he was now involv'd in. ADRASTUS had scarcely forsaken the Caramanian Confines, before the Prince became as much estrang'd in his Affections to the fair Wife of that unhappy Nobleman, as he had caused her to be to him the untasted Sweets of VIOLETTA'S innocent Beauties kindled in his Heart a Fire, which nothing but their Possession could extinguish. He knew MARMILLIO was the Person who introduced her to the Service of HYANTHE, and that she depended on his Advice and Care, as she would do on that of a Parent.
  It was therefore chiefly in his power to seduce her, and to persuade her, that Virtue would be of little advantage to her in a Place where the contrary was so much in fashion. He had conferr'd too many Obligations on this Favourite and, indeed, knew him too zealously devoted to his Service, to suppose he would make a scruple of any thing which might afford him satisfaction he therefore communicated his Thoughts to him on this occasion with the utmost freedom, and talk'd to him in a manner, as if he doubted not to be in an almost immediate possession of his Wishes by his means but he had not entirely finish'd all he had to say, before he perceiv'd MARMILLIO to change Colour, and by many Symptoms denote, that he was either unwilling, or unable to execute this Commission which obliging him to change the form of his Discourse, What, said he to him, is the Happiness of a Prince, who desires nothing more than to make thee happy, of so little account with thee, that thou canst hesitate at working to my Will a silly Girl, who would doubtless rejoice to find herself so considerable to her Sovereign. Ah, sacred Sir! replied MARMILLIO, the Gods of Caramania can witness for me, how much I bless their Bounty, when whenever they afford me an occasion of testifying the Regard I pay your Highness Had VIOLETTA any thing in her of the Disposition of her Sex, I might indulge my Wishes with the hope of serving you, but she is colder than the frozen North, not to be warm'd by all the Artifices of melting Love and less ambitious than the poor Cottagemaid, who never heard of Grandeur, or had a Wish beyond her Milking pail. How often have I seen her fly, obscure her Charms in Solitude, or run for Protection behind the Princess's Chair, to shield herself from hearing the Courtier's Address? — How regardless does she view the admiring Crowd? How little does she adorn her Beauties? How negligent is she in pleasing? Is not this, continued he, my Lord! a Behaviour which may make me justly fear all that I can urge will be of no effect? I have remarked, resumed the 'Prince, the artless Innocence which appears in all her Actions and did I not believe there were a difficulty in gaining her, would think the Employment unworthy of thy Skill. Were she to be won by rich Presents, and Promises of future Greatness, my Page might, in my name, convey them to her, and bargain for her Heart.—Or did the CourtAmusements please her, in publick Balls, and private Pressures of her Hand, I might have hope to catch her Senses but so perfect a Modesty can only by Time and Argument be won and that alas! the ARGUS Eyes, which daily are upon me, deny me to make tryal of. But thou, MARMILLIO, art admitted even in her retir'd Moments and under the sanction of a Guardian's Name may'st steal upon her Thoughts, and, e'er she is aware, inspire her with Desires in favour of my Passion with amorous Chat melt down her Soul, and warm into yielding.— Then, when thou findst her moulded to the purpose, stamp the Impression of thy Prince's Image Say how I languish, burn, despair, and die say any thing, to prove it Murder, Treason, Parricide, to deny my Suit.
  The Prince utter'd these Words with too much Vehemence for the other not to know all opposition would be in vain and tho' he could not promise himself any great Success, resolv'd to try his utmost Skill for the obtaining for his Prince the 'Happiness he requir'd. He therefore assur'd him, in the most submissive Terms, of his Attachment to his Interest, and that he would omit nothing which might be conducive to promote it. The Prince, who doubted not his Sincerity, urg'd no more than that he would be as speedy as possible in the execution of this Commission and telling him, that, till he was the Master of VIOLETTA'S Beauties, he could not hope to know one easy moment, left him at liberty, to study on the means which might make him so.
  The Reader will, perhaps, be surpriz'd, that, considering the Character of MARMILLIO, and the Services he had done of the same nature for his Prince, he mould now with so much difficulty be prevail'd on to engage in this. The Ruin of a young Virgin, like VIOLETTA, and the Injury he should do a Family, by whom he had been treated with the utmost respect, would appear but faint Obstructions to a Man of his Humour, who, in every Action of his Life, had testify'd no Sense of Pity, Gratitude, or Honournor indeed would he in the least have hesitated, had nothing but what I have mention'd deterr'd him But, besides that he knew she was possess'd of all that Modesty and Strictness of Virtue he had represented to the Prince, he knew, that happening to be in the Antichamber of the Princess's Apartment, she had overheard some Conference between THEODORE and ISMONDA, which had let her into the secret of their Amour. She had frequently spoke of it to him with Wonder and Detestationand he no oftener had endeavour'd to excuse, than she to reproach such a consequence of Love. The Sense she had of the Crime, was sufficient to make him know it would not be easy to prevail on her to become guilty of it but to work a change in her Sentiments, in favour of. a Person, whom she was certain Was not only married, but also engaged in an Amour with another, seem'd to him an Utter Impossibilitynor could all his Wit furnish him with one Pretence, which he could think would be received.
  To save his Credit therefore with the Prince, he had recourse to the most cruel Stratagera.thafc ever enterd' the Hem of Man. Despairing to corrupt her Principles, or inspire her with any Tenderness for a Man, of whose Heart he could not hope to possess above a third slure after having told THEODORE that all the Arguments he could use had been of no essect, he persuades. him to force the Joy, which he found it was impossible for him to obtain by any other means.
  RasiS, amorous, and ungovernable as this Prince was in all his Passions, such a Proposition extremely sliock'd him he had an inimitable share of Goodnature, and as much Honour as was consistent with the Inconstancy of his Temper and told MARMILLIO, that he could not consent to such an Action, though the perpetrating it was all for which he wish'd to live, and charg'd him t renew his Endeavours to make her his by other means than those. The other Z propromis'd htm ta obey, not daring td let him know the reason why he believed they would be eternally in vain.
  In fine, without uttering one syllable of the Prince's Passion to her, he continued every day to assure him, that he found her Heart impregnable as a Rock, that he had try'd her every way, and that there was now no remaining hope, but in the course he had before advis'd. What will not the subtile Insinuations of the Person one loves, when concurring with one's own Inclination, in time prevail on one to be guilty of!
  The Prince, impatient to possess, and made to believe that nothing but Forca could afford the long'dfor Bliss, at last half yielded to the Persuasions of his Favourite who, to remove the only now remaining Scruple, that of the thing being known, contriv'd this Stratagem, that he should not appear in his own shape, and the destin'd Victim of his wild Desires be ignorant to whom she ow'd her Ruin. Honour now lull'd to sleep, and all the nobler Faculties drown'd in the Excess of an o'erflowing and tumultuous Passion, he consented with pleasure to the Proposal, and left the management of it to him, who promised to accomplish it in a very short time. 
  Nothing could be more easy, than for hiim, who was so intimate with her, to betray her in, this manner And the Method he took to do it was this he caused an Egyptian Habit to be made for the Prince, and a tawny. Mask, so artificially contriv'd, that whoever. had it on, would appear to have no other Face, than that which Nature had bestow'd And intreating the Prince to come into his Apartment, You must condescend, my Lord, said he, like JUPITER, to assume a Shame unworthy of . you, when you attempt an Enterprize of this kind.. The things being try'd, and fitting exactly, never Man was more delighted than THEODORE but yet could not conceive of what service this Disguise was to him, or how design'd to be made use of, till MARMILLIO pluck'd out two Letters, the one directed for himself, the other to VIOLETTA These, said he, are written by a hand, so exactly counterfeiting that of CARICLEA, that were herself to see them, she could imagine them dictated in her Sleep. ——They contain a Recommendation of an Egyptian Eunuch, whom this careful Sister entreats the young VIOLETTA to entertain as the Guardian of her Virtue So many Stratagems being daily contriv'd at Court to destroy the Innocence of a Virgin, she cannot think her safe without this watchful ARGUS, who, incapable of injuring her himself, will be her Security from all others. He is therefore to lie in her Chamber, lest any Attempts mould be made on her sleeping Virtue. Your Highness, continued he, has nothing to do to carry on this Plot, but to personate this Slave for an hour or two, for it shall be wear night when I present you and to excuse your absence, you must pretend a little Indisposition, and dismiss all but me from your Attendance. The transported THEODORE agreed it should be done that very Evening and having appear'd in the Drawingroom long enough to give a colour to the thing, cry'd out on a sudden, that his Head ach'd, and retir'd hastily to his own Apartment where being follow'd by all the Gentlemen of his BedChamber, he order'd a profound Silence to be kept, and that none but MARMILLIO should stay in the Room.
  Every body being remov'd, he began to equip himself in the Egyptian Habiliments, which the assiduous Favourite had before convey'd by a back way into the Chamberby which also, as soon as dress'd, they went, and so to the Apartment, who, being not then in waiting, they found at home. MARMILLIO presented her with the Letters of the Slave , which she had no sooner read, than Hie blushed prodigiously, at the thoughts of permitting any thing that bore the shape of Man to lie in her Chamber but MARMILLIO assuring her, that it was the Custom in all those Countries where the Men are jealous of the Honour of their Families, she at last consented to obey the Injunction of her Sister. But here imme diately rose another Obstacle, which was, that according to the Cullom of Caramania,hc having but one Bed in her Chamber, he must lie in another till one could be put up But this was not an Obstacle which was beyond the Wit of MARMILLIO to fair mount he presently told her, that these Slaves never lay but on Carpets, which could be spread in a moment, and as easily remov'd.
  The good Opinion she had of hinv the observant Care with which he had ever treated her, and her Sister's Commands, left her no room to hesitate, whether what they injoin'd was for her good, or not and she order'd her Woman to lee it perform'd. The Royal Slave, who pretended not to understand one word of the Caramanian Language, was entertain d by the Servants, in as civil a manner as possible but it was no small diversion to him, to behold the wonder with which all the Women look'd upon him, and the Mirth which his suppos'd Condition occasion'd among them, every one speaking according to the Sentiments of her Heart, without reserve before him, in confidence he knew not what they said.
But when Night came, and he saw the lovely VIOLETTA in her Bed how difficult' was it for him to restrain the Impaticncies of his burning Passion, till she was asleep, not daring to stir from his Carpets till then, lest she should alarm the Family but a more than ordinary Drouziness, by her ill Angel cast on her Senses, made her presently fall into the Condition he wish'd  which he no sooner pereciv'd, than he quitted the uneasy Position in which he had lain, the Eagerness of Desire with which he sciz'd upon her Beauties leaving no time for the Preparatives of Kisses, and Degrees of Caresses, he in a moment became Master of too much, not to put it past her power to keep from him any part of what he wisiYd. But in what words is it possible to set forth the Rage! the Horror! the Surprize with which she waked, and found this bold Intruder! She struggled, would have shriek'd for help, but Kisses stopp'd the one, and more prevailing Strength rendred the other of no effect.——— In fine, she was undone, and he as happy as the full Possession of her Charms could make him but Tears, and Vows, not to outlive the loss of Honour, allay'd the Joy, and turn'd him all into Endeavours to mitigate the Tempest of her spoke to her, excusing what he had done by the Violence of a Passion, which disdain'd all Bounds, and would fly to any Artifice to shun Despair.
  Oh! by whom, cry'd she, have I been thus abus'd? yet, if thou lovest thy Life, continued she, I charge thee do not tell me, for be assur'd, I will revenge this Wrong. It was not to show that he not fear'd this Threat, but believing the knowledge of his Quality would ease the present Horrors of her Soul, he difeover'd to her who he was at which indeed her Surprize increas'd, but a small Portion of her Griess abated the Rank of her Undoer took not away the Shame of being undone, and tho' she ceas'd to revile, she did not to complain Oh Cruel Prince! said she, what could provoke you to the Ruin of a harmless Maid, who never injur'd you even in a Thought? Your Heart and Vows elsewhere devoted, how small your Satisfaction, and how immense my Woe !——Wretch that I am, pursud she, after a little pause, Death only can put a period to my irreparable Shame. In this manner did she go on, nor could less be expected from a Woman of her strict Modesty yet had the Prince the pleasure to observe, that either the Respect flic paid him as her Sovereign, or a secret Inclination to his Person, made her suffer his continued Endearments with less reluctance  than. than before. As he was indeed one of the most lovely and accomplish'd Men on earth, it was not difficult for him to make the most favourable Impression on a Heart ib entirely unprepossess'd as was hers to add to this, he addrefs'd her in the softest, most engaging terms that Love and Wit could dictate and before Morning, if she was not brought to think what he had done no Crime, she was at least to wish it were not so and though she did not in words declare so much, the tender Pressures, the Languishments, which, unawares even to herself, her Arms, and Eyes bestow'd on him, confess'd the melting God had pleaded in her Heart so powerfully in the defence of his Votary, that she now more than forgave the Effects of his embolden'd Passion.
Transported with this Discovery, he pursued his Conquest, and swore to hold her for ever Prisoner in his Arms, if she would not seal his Pardon, and consent henceforth to give a loose to Rapture. Faintly she struggled to get free from the sweet Confinement, but could not speak A thousand, and a thousand times he repeated the same Request, before her Tongue could utter what her swimming Eyes sufficiently made known and when, to prevail on him to rise, it being now broad day, all she could bring forth was, Tes. Enough confirm'd that he was Master of her Soul, as well as Body, he now forsook the happy Scene of Pleasure and having clothed himself in his Disguise, retired to his Carpets from which, as ibon as her Woman came into the Chamber, he rose, and went into another Room whence, taking his opportunity, he pass'd to his own Apartment, where MARMILLIO .waited with impatience to know the End of this Adventure.
  The Prince making him a full relation of all that had pass'd, he was not a little alarm'd, when he first heard he had discover' d who he was, not knowing how far the Fury of a Woman, thus abus'd, might transport her but when he was told how kindly she forgave the Deceit, he as much applauded himself for the Contrivance. The Prince express'd his Sense of it in terms the most obliging to him, and passionate TOVIOLETTA which let this Favourite know, that his Desires being yet unsatiated, he would still have need of his Assistance to procure their future Interviews.
  He managed this Affair, as he had done all others of this nature, with which he had been entrusted, so much to the satisfaction of the Prince, that he became more in his favour than ever. —The Intimacy between him and VIOLETTA, was known ty every body, and she met the Prince at his Apartment, under the pretence of visiting a Person, who was look'd upon as her Guardian, without the least suspicion, for a considerable time,, But what can escape the Eyes of jealous Love? ISMONDA finding the Prince more than ordinarily cool in the Devoirs he was accustomed to pay her, bent her whole study on. a discovery of the C au se i w h ich sh e .. at last discover'd, an d that MARMILJLIO also was the Person t whom she owed her Misfortune having an opportunity of speaking to him soon after she arrived at this knowledge, she upbraided him in the severest terms wept, threatned, rail'd, entreated, by turns did every thing that an amorous and impatient Woman would do on the like occasion. Finding her too well inform'd of the Secret, he would not heighten her Rage of Temper by any Endeavours to conceal the Truth, but again made use of the same Arguments he had before urged on the score of EURIDICE, and advised her indeed ro the wisest Method she could now pursue Her Reputation lost, her Interest with the Princess changed to its reverse, rendred an Alien to her Family, and for ever abandoned by her Husband, her whole dependance consisted in the favour of THEODORE  which, if she nee forfeited, by an imprudent Attempt to controll him in what he esteem'd a Pleasure, she must expect the worst and most unpity'd Fate to which a Woman can possibly be reduced, that of a forsaken Mistress Whereas if she seem'd not to know, what by resenting she could not remedy, she Would not fail of retaining his Respect, and perhaps too retrieve his Love. To arm her to go through this Task with less difficulty, he ventusd to let her know this had not been the first false step the Prince had made and by reminding her, that in spite of all the new Attractions which had hitherto fallen in his way, she had still preserv'd her Empire o'er his Soul, flatter'd her with the opinion she should always do so and by degrees moderated the first Emotions of her jealous Rage so well, that she consented to seem blind to what she but too well saw But alas! she had now reduced herself to a Condition, which made it the only Expedient to preserve her from Misery, Contempt, and all those Ills a Woman in her Circumstances must be obliged to bear when abandon'd by him for whom she incurr'd them.
  AS for VIOLETTA, her Character as yet remained untouch'd Egyptian Slave, who lay in her Chamber, and was never heard of after, was by MARMILLIO 'S Artifices suppos'd to have taken that opportunity of robbing her of some Jewels which she had worn that Day and confiding in his Honesty, had not order'd to be secured and by the Diligence of the same Person, the enamour'd Prince has frequent Opportunities of revelling with her to the height of that Desire, which she now feels in equal proportion with himself. How long a Space of Time their present Ardours will continue, or what must become of unhappy ISMONDA, hereafter must reveal but 'tis highly probable, that in a Passion liable to such Vicissitudes, as have been observ'd in the course of these Memoirs, there will happen Occurrences worthy of Observation y which shall then, as they fall out, be communicated to the Publick. 
Finis.
